1 
 
The National Civil (Code) Act, 2017 (2074) 
 
Table of Contents 
 
S . N .      C o n t e n t s     P a g e  
1.1 Part-1 Preliminary 
 Chapter-1 Prelimin ary Statements 
 Chapter-2 General Prin ciples of Civil Law 
 Chapter-3 Provisions Rel ating to Civil Rights 
1.2 Part-2 Law Relating to Persons 
 Chapter-1 Provisions Rela ting to Natural Persons 
 Chapter-2 Provisions Rel ating to Legal Persons 
 Chapter-3 Provisions Relating to  Bankruptcy of Natural Persons 
1.3 Part-3 Family Law 
 Chapter-1 Provisions Relating to Marriage 
 Chapter-2 Provisions Relating to Consequences of Marriage 
 Chapter-3 Provisions  Relating to Divorce 
 Chapter-4 Provisions Relating to Relationship of Parents and 
Children 
 Chapter-5 Provisions Relating to Maternal and Paternal Authority 
 Chapter-6 Provisions Rel ating to Guardianship 
 Chapter-7 Provisions Relating to Curatorship 
 Chapter-8 Provisions  Relating to Adoption 
 Chapter-9 Provisions Relatin g to Inter-country Adoption 
 Chapter-10 Provisions Relating to Partition 
Chapter-11 Provisions Relating to Succession
2 
 
1.4 Part-4 Law Relating to Property 
 Chapter-1 General Provisio ns Relating to Property 
 Chapter-2 Provisions Relatin g to Ownership and Possession 
 Chapter-3 Provisions Rela ting to Use of Property 
Chapter-4 Provisions Relating to Cultivatio n, Possession and 
 Registration of Land 
Chapter-5 Provisions Relating to Government, Public and  
  Community Property 
 Chapter-6 Provisions  Relating to Trusts 
 Chapter-7 Provisions Relating to Usufruct 
 Chapter-8 Provisions Relating to Servitudes 
 Chapter-9 Provisions Relating to House Rent 
 Chapter-10 Provisions Relating to Gift and Donation 
 Chapter-11 Provisions Relating to  Transfer and Acquisition of 
   P r o p e r t y  
 Chapter-12 Provisions Relating to Mortgage of Immovable  
   P r o p e r t y  
 Chapter-13 Provisions Relating to Pre-emption of Immovable  
   P r o p e r t y  
 Chapter-14 Provisions Relatin g to Registration of Deeds 
 Chapter-15 Provisions Rel ating to Transactions 
1.5 Part-5 Provisions Relating  to Contracts and Other  
   L i a b i l i t i e s  
 Chapter-1 Provisions Relating to Obligations 
 Chapter-2 Provisions Relatin g to Formation of Contracts 
 Chapter-3 Validity of Contracts 
 Chapter-4 Provisions Relating to Performance of Contracts
3 
 
 Chapter-5 Provisions Relating to Breach of Contracts and  
   Remedies  
 Chapter-6 Provisions Relating to  Contracts of Sales of Goods 
 Chapter-7 Provisions Relatin g to Contracts of Guarantee 
 Chapter-8 Provisions Relatin g to Contracts of Bailment  
 Chapter-9 Provisions Relating to  Contracts of Pledge or Deposit 
 Chapter-10 Provisions Relatin g to Contracts of Agency 
 Chapter-11 Provisions Relating to  Contracts of Carriage of Goods 
 Chapter-12 Provisions Rela ting to Contracts of Lease 
 Chapter-13 Provisions Relatin g to Hire-purchase Contracts 
 Chapter-14 Provisions  Relating to Wages 
 Chapter-15 Provisions Relating to  Indirect or Quasi-Contracts 
 Chapter-16 Provisions Relatin g to Unjust Enrichment 
 Chapter-17 Provisions  Relating to Torts 
 Chapter-18 Provisions Relating to  Liability for Defective Products 
1.6 Part-6 Provisions Relating  to Private International Law
4 
 
The National Civil (Code) Act, 2017 (2074) 
Date of Authentication:  
16 October 2017  
Act Number 34 of the year 2017 
An Act Made To Amend And Consolidate Civil Laws 
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to make  timely the civil provisions 
contained in the Country Code a nd other laws, by also amending and 
consolidating such provisions, in or der to maintain mo rality, decency, 
etiquette and convenience as well as economic interest of the public by 
maintaining law and order in the country and maintain harmonious 
relationship between various castes, races and communities, by making just 
provisions in the economic, social and cultural fields; 
Now, therefore, the Legislature-Parliament under clause (1) of 
Article 296 of the Constitution of Nepal has enacted this Act. 
Part-1 
Preliminary 
Chapter-1 
General Provisions 
1. Short title and commencement:  (1) This Act may be cited as the 
"National Civil (Code), 2017". 
(2) It shall come into force on 17 August 2018 (first day of the 
month of Bhadra of the year 2075). 
2. Definitions:  Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in 
this Act,-
5 
 
(a) “court” means the Supr eme Court, High Court or 
District Court, and this te rm includes a court, other 
judicial body or authority au thorized by law to proceed 
and adjudicate any specific type of civil cases, 
(b) "law" means a law in force for the time being, 
(c) "person" means a natural pe rson and this term includes 
a legal person, 
(d) "law-suit" means a statemen t of claims, and this term 
includes any other kind of complaint, claim, 
counterclaim or eq uivalent petition, 
(e) “minor” means a child who has not attained eighteen 
years of age, 
(f) "Local Level" means the Rural Municipality 
(Gownpalika) or Municipality, 
(g) "property" means any mova ble or immovable property, 
(h) "heir" means a person who is  in the order of priority  
for succession pursuant  to Section 239. 
3. Not to prejudice speci al legal provisions:  Where a law in force 
provides a separate provision in any matter regulated by this Act, 
no provision of this Act sha ll affect such a matter.
6 
 
Chapter - 2 
General Principles of Civil Law 
4. Principles and provisions  applicable generally:  The principles 
and provisions referred to in th is Chapter shall generally be 
applicable to the matters of civil law. 
5. Ignorance of law not to be excused : The ignorance of law shall 
not be excused. Every one shall be  presumed to have the knowledge 
of law. 
6.  Act against public int erest not to be carried out:  No one may 
carry out any act in such a manner so that it may be  against public 
interest. 
7.  Act contrary to  law to be invalid:  Any act contrary to law shall be 
invalid. 
8.  A wrongdoer to bear lia bility for loss or damage:  (1) A person 
who causes loss or damage to another person by committing a 
wrong while doing, or causing to be done any act shall bear the 
liability for such loss or damage. 
(2) Every person shall himself or herself bear the 
consequences of any wrongful act committed by him or her. 
(3) Except as otherwise provided for in this Act or law, the 
concerned person shall bear compensation to perform the liability 
referred to in sub-section (1). 
(4) Determination of the Compensation shall be as 
provided for in the law.
7 
 
9. Act causing nuisance to  other not to be done:  No person shall do, 
or cause to be done,  any act that causes nuisance, annoyance or 
damage to prestige, reputation or property of another person. 
10.  Not to enjoy benefit of wrong: No person shall be entitled to enjoy 
benefit accrued from hi s or her own wrong.   
11. Act against interest to be invalid:  Any act done against the 
interest of a person who is under one's own guardianship, 
curatorship, subjection or influen ce or likely be under influence 
shall be invalid. 
12. Personality to be recognized:  Every person shall recognize other 
person's personality. 
13. Good neighborhood to be maintained:  Every person shall 
maintain so good nei ghborhood as not to cause  damage, loss to the 
community or neighbors of  his or her residence.   
14. Not to be relieved from civil liability:  No person shall be relieved 
from a civil liability under the law merely on the ground that the 
proceeding of criminal offense is initiated or not initiated against 
him or her.  
15. Custom or tradition contrary  to law not to be recognized:  No 
custom or tradition contrary to law shall be reco gnized in the 
dispensation of justice.   
16. Applicable to foreigners as well:  Except in cas es where the 
subject, context or nature requires application of any legal provision 
only to a Nepali citizen, this Ac t or other provisi ons concerning 
civil law shall be equally appli cable to a foreigner as well.
8 
 
Chapter - 3 
Provisions Relating To Civil Rights  
17. To be equal before law:  (1) Every citizen shall be equal before 
law. 
(2) No citizen shall be depriv ed of equal protection of law.   
18. Discrimination not to be made: (1) No discrimination shall be 
made in the application of ge neral law on grounds of origin, 
religion, color, caste, race, sex,  physical conditi on, disability, 
condition of health, marital status , pregnancy, economic condition, 
language, region, ideolo gical conviction or on similar other ground.  
(2) No person shall discrimina ted in any public and private 
place on grounds of origin, religion , color, caste, race, sex, physical 
condition, disability, condition of health, marital status, pregnancy, 
economic condition, langu age, region, ideologi cal conviction or on 
similar other ground; and no person shall, on such ground, be 
prevented from using service, amenit ies or utilities of public use or 
from entering into a public place or public religious place or from 
performing religious act acco rding to his or her will. 
(3) No person shall be discri minated on ground of sex with 
regard to remuneration and social  security for the same work. 
(4) In appointing any citizen to a governmental or public 
office, he or she shal l be appointed only on the basis of the 
qualifications determined by the la w. In so appointing, no citizen 
shall be discriminated on grounds of origin, religion, color, caste, 
race, sex, physical condi tion, disability, condit ion of health, marital
9 
 
status, pregnancy, economic condition, language, region, 
ideological conviction or  similar other ground. 
19. Discrimination not to be d eemed where special provision is 
made: Notwithstanding anything cont ained in Sections 17 and 18, 
any special provision made by la w for the protection, empowerment 
or development of the citizens th at are socially or culturally 
backward women, dalit, indigenous, indigeno us nationalities , 
Madhesi, Tharu, Muslims, oppresse d class, backward class, 
minorities, marginalized , peasants, workers, youths, children, senior 
citizens, gender and sexual minorit ies, persons with  disabilities, 
pregnant women, the incompetent or he lpless, backward region and 
also economically indigent Khash Arya shall not be considered to 
be a discrimination. 
20. Guarantee of f reedoms and rights:  (1) No person shall be 
deprived of personal liberty except in accordan ce with law. 
(2) Every citizen shall, subject  to law, have the following 
freedoms and rights: 
(a) To express one’s opi nion and expression, 
(b) To assemble, hold asse mbly, conferen ce peacefully 
without arms, 
(c) To form union and association, 
(d) To move and reside in any part of Nepal, 
(e) To practice any profession, employment, industry, 
business,
10 
 
(f) To obtain education of his or her choice or in his or 
her mother tongue, 
(g) To earn, use, transfer property and carry out any 
other transaction of property, 
(h) To profess and practice his or her religion practiced 
from time immemorial, subj ect to the compliance of 
public morality and traditions, 
(i) To preserve and promote the language, script or 
culture of his or her community, 
(j) To operate a religious pl ace and religious trust, by 
maintaining independent ex istence of his or her 
religious community, 
(k) To protect or maintain privacy of his or her body, 
residence, property, document, correspondence or 
information. 
21. Right to privacy d eemed to be violated:  (1) If any person 
commits, save in accordance with law, any of the following acts 
without obtaining consent of the co ncerned person, he or she shall 
be deemed to have violated the right to privacy: 
(a) Entry into any person’s residence, 
(b) Opening a person's co rrespondence or using it, 
taping or recording or listening the discourse, 
speech, sound throug h the medium of telephone or 
other technology,
11 
 
(c) Watching, publishi ng, broadcasting or 
disseminating activities, behaviors of personal life 
of a person, 
(d) Taking figure or ph otograph of a person, 
(e) Imitating other's name, figure, photograph, sound 
and making the same public.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in clause (d) or (e) 
of sub-section (1), if a person co mmits any act referred to in the 
said clauses for literary or artist ic purpose or pub lic interest, the 
right to privacy shall not be de emed to have been violated. 
22. Right to make contract:  Every citizen shall have the right to make 
a contract subject  to the law. 
23. No taxation except in accordance with law:  No tax shall be levied 
on and collected from a person’s  property or income save in 
accordance with law. 
24. Not to employ in work against will:  No person shall be employed 
in a work against his or her will. 
25. Property not to be acquired , requisitioned, auctioned or 
forfeited: (1) The State shall not acquire , requisition, or otherwise 
create any right in, the property  of anyone, ex cept in accordance 
with law for the purpos e of public interest. 
  Provided that this provision shall not apply to a property 
earned illegally. 
(2) No property of anyone shal l be auctioned or forfeited 
except in accordan ce with law.
12 
 
26. Complaint may be filed:   (1) A person who is arrested or detained 
or any one on his or her behalf may file a petition in the Supreme 
Court, High Court or Dist rict Court for the writ of habeas corpus. 
(2) If a person files a petition in more than one court, the 
petition filed in the higher  court shall be maintained. 
(3) If a person commit or there is sufficient suspicion that 
he or she is going to commit any act in contravention of this 
Chapter, the person aggrieved fr om such an act may, for the 
enforcement of his or he r right, file a petition in the High Court or 
District Court having te rritorial jurisdiction. 
(4) If it is found from inquir y into the petition filed 
pursuant to sub-section (1) that the person has been arrested or 
detained against law, the concerne d court shall order to release him 
or her immediately. 
(5) If it is found from inquir y in respect of the petition 
filed pursuant to sub-section (3 ) that the respondent has caused 
some damage or is about to cause damage to the petitioner's right, 
the concerned court may issue an order requiring the respondent to 
refrain from committing, or cau sing to be committed, any act 
damaging the petitioner’s right, and where some act has already 
been committed, from committing, or  causing to be committed, the 
remaining act, or to do any act. 
27. Compensation to be awarded:  (1) If, from the examination of the 
complaint filed pursuant to Sectio n 26, the respondent is found to 
have maliciously committed any act causing damage to the 
complainant, the concerned court shall, having regard to the
13 
 
circumstances, order the re spondent to pay reasonable 
compensation to the complainant. 
(2) If an official or employ ee working in a governmental 
or public body is held  to have knowingly viol ated the civil rights 
referred to in this Chapter, su ch an official or employee shall 
personally bear the amount of co mpensation referred to in sub-
section (1).  
28. Compensation for fi ling false complaint:  (1) If a person  is held to 
have filed a complaint with the in tention of knowingly causing pain 
or loss or damage to a person, the concerned court shall order the 
person so filing the false co mplaint to pay a reasonable 
compensation to the respondent. 
(2) The compensation  to be awarded under sub-section (1) 
shall include the costs incurred by the respondent for defense before 
the court, court fees and legal practitioner's cost. 
29. Statute of limitation:  A person aggrieved fr om any act done or 
action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit any time in the 
case of arrest or detention, and wi thin a period of six months after 
the date on which such  an act or action was done or taken, in the 
other cases.
14 
 
Part - 2 
Law Relating to Persons 
Chapter – 1 
Provisions Relating to Natural Persons 
30. To be recognized as person:  Every person shall,  immediately after 
birth, be recognized as  a person and be entitl ed to exercise rights 
under law until he or she survives. 
31. Right to Name: (1) Every person shall, immediately after birth, 
have right to name and be en titled to use the given name 
respectfully. 
(2) Every person shall have the right to defend his or her 
name, reputation and prestige and such right shall not be 
transferable to others. 
  (3) No person shall be al lowed to abuse another’s name. 
32. To attain competency: (1) Every person who attains eighteen 
years of age shall be considered to become a major, and shall, in the 
same capacity, be considered  to be legally competent.  
(2) A person who is competen t under sub-sec tion (1) may, 
subject to law, exercise, bear a nd discharge any right, obligation 
and duty whatsoever. 
33. To be considered incompetent: (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in Section 32, a person wh o has not attained ten years of 
age, or even if attained  that age, is unable to protect his or her right 
and interest for the reason of unsoundness of mind shall be 
considered to be legally incompetent.
15 
 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Act, the term 
"unsoundness of mind" means the condition of  being incapable, due 
to physical and mental ill heal th, of knowing the act done by 
oneself in general understanding  and consequences thereof. 
(2) An incompetent pe rson does not have to bear any type 
of legal obligation, and while exer cising a right, it has to be 
exercised, or cause to be exercise d, only with the consent of the 
guardian or curator or through the guardian or curator, as the case 
may be. 
(3) In executing a document on behalf of an incompetent 
person, it shall be execu ted, or caused to be ex ecuted, through his or 
her guardian or curator, as the case may be. 
34. To be considered quasi-competent:  (1) A person who has 
attained ten years of age but no t completed eighteen years of age 
shall be considered as a quasi-competent person.  
(2) A quasi-competent person  may, subject to law, 
exercise, bear and discharge an y right, obligation and duty 
whatsoever. 
(3) A quasi-comp etent person shall, in  exercising a right, 
obtain the consent of the guardian or curator or exercise the right 
through the guardian or curator, as the case may be. 
(4) In executing a document by a quasi-competent person, 
it shall be executed in the presence of his or he r guardian or curator, 
as the case may be.
16 
 
35. To be according to court decision:   If a dispute arises about a 
person's competen cy, incompetency  or quasi-comp etency, it shall 
be settled according to th e decision of the court. 
36. Physical examination or ch ange of organ may be made:  (1) Any 
person may, subject to law, get hi s or her body exam ined, treated or 
transplanted or collected  any organ or part or a sample of his or her 
body.  
(2) If a person is so incapable that he or she cannot express 
his or her consent, his or her guardi an or curator, as  the case may be, 
for the interest of such a person, car ry out, or cause to be carried out, 
the act referred to in  sub-section (1). 
37. Power to specify method of one’s  cremation, obsequies rites or 
funereal acts: (1) Any person may, while he  or she is alive, specify 
the manner of cremation, obsequie s rites or funer eal acts to be 
carried out after his or her death. 
(2) If a person has specified  the manner of cremation, 
obsequies rites or fune real acts pursuant to s ub-section (1), his or 
her successor shall carry out his or her cremation, ob sequies rites or 
funereal acts accordingly. 
(3) If a person has not specified the manner of his or her 
cremation, obsequies rites or funer eal acts pursuant to sub-section 
(1), his or her successor shall conduct such person's cremation, 
obsequies rites or funereal acts acco rding to the prevailing custom 
and tradition. 
38. Power to donate corpse or organ:  (1) Any person may express in 
writing his or her will to donate, after his or her death, his or her
17 
 
corpse or any organ of body or any part thereo f to a person for the 
purpose of using, or causing to be  used, such corpse or organ for a 
particular work. 
(2) If a person has expressed hi s or her will pursuant to 
sub-section (1), his or  her successor shall use the d eceased’s corpse, 
part of the body or a portion thereof according to th e will of the 
deceased. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (2), 
if the person accepting su ch corpse, organ or a ny part thereof is not 
available or if it is not possible to detach such corpse, organ or any 
part thereof, cremation, obsequie s rites or funereal acts of such 
corpse shall be conducted pursuant to Section 37. 
39. To be considered address of residence: (1) If a person's address of 
residence needs to be determined, the address given by him or her 
for that purpose, where he or she ha s so given, and if not so given, 
the place of his or her permanent residence w ithin Nepal shall be 
considered to be the address of his or her residence.  
(2) If a person does not ha ve residence or his or her 
residence is not traced out pursuant to sub-s ection (1), the place of 
his or her abode for the time being shall be considered to be the 
address of his or her residence. 
(3) If a person does not have a residence or his or her 
residence is not traced out pursuant  to sub-section (1) or (2) and the 
person has carried on any trade, business, employment or 
transaction, the place where he or she has so carried on trade,
18 
 
business, employment or transaction shall be considered to be the 
address of his or her residence. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
(2) or (3), where the address of a person's residence is changed, the 
place where he or she is residi ng for the time being shall be 
considered to be the address of his or her residence. 
(5) If the residence of an in competent or quasi-competent 
person needs to be determined, th e place of his or her permanent 
residence and if such place is not traced out, the place where his or 
her guardian or curator re sides shall be consider ed to be the address 
of his or her residence. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, if a person co nsiders any address as the place of his or her 
residence for a particular purpose, such a place shall be considered 
to be the address of his or her residence. 
40. Presumed to be dead: (1) If a person misars without any notice for 
a period of consecutive twelve years or if a person for whom it is 
natural to have information about such disappeared person has not 
received any information about him or  her for the last  twelve years, 
such a person shall, except in cases where an  evidence establishing 
that he or she is al ive is received, be deemed to be dead.  
Provided that in the following  circumstance, such a person 
shall be deemed to ha ve died after the comp letion of the following 
period: 
(1) In the case of a person  having attained eighty 
years of age, five years,
19 
 
(2) In the case of a soldier de puted to war-field, four 
years after the cessa tion of the war; 
(3) In the case of a person tr aveling by an aircraft, 
ship or other vehicle that met with an accident, 
three years after the da te of such accident. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3) of 
the proviso to sub-sectio n (1), if a person di es in an accident and 
there is no evid ence of another person meeting with the same 
accident to remain alive,  such a person also sh all be deemed to have 
died at the same time.  
(3) Where more than one pers on are dead at  one and the 
same time in an accident, each person  so died is deemed, except as 
otherwise proved, to have b een died at the same time. 
Provided that where, for a part icular purpose, a question that 
which of the persons died  first in such an acci dent requires to be 
settled, the person who was older by age at the time of death shall, 
unless otherwise proved, be deem ed to have been died first. 
(4) If the concerned person file s a petition stating that any 
person has disappeared wi thout a notice or  died due to a disaster or 
accident and requests fo r a judicial declarat ion on such person's 
death, disclosing therewith the date , place, cause of death and basis 
thereof, the court may, after exam ining the evidence, make an order 
of judicial declar ation on the death of such a person. 
(5) If a person already declar ed dead pursuant to sub-
section (4) comes back al ive and files a petition in person to get the 
judicial declaration made earlier to  be annulled or if his or her
20 
 
successor files a petition for ame ndment to the prev ious judicial 
declaration on death for the reason that the date of  death of such 
deceased happened to be different than the date  referred to in the 
judicial declaration, the court sh all, having exam ined into this 
matter, annul or amend the judicial  declaration made pursuant to 
sub-section (4).     
Provided that- 
(1) Where a living wife has concluded another 
marriage after such declar ation, the matrimonial 
relationship with the person declared to be dead 
cannot be re-established. 
(2) There shall be no adve rse effect on the legal 
right of the person d eclared to be dead. 
(3) The act that has alr eady been carried out 
pursuant to the previous judicial declaration shall 
not be prejudiced by virtue of the establishment 
of a new date of death. 
(4) The right, interest or concern of the person 
provided by law shall not be affected by any act 
done or action taken purs uant to clause (3). 
41. Statute of limitation:  A person aggrieved fr om any act done or 
action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit as follows: 
(a) In the case of the circum stance referred to in Section 
36, within three months afte r the date on which such 
act was done or action taken,
21 
 
(b) In the case of the circumstance refe rred to in sub-
section (5) of Section 40, with in one year after the date 
of knowledge of such  an act or action, 
(c) In any circumstance other than that referred to in 
clauses (a) and (b), within si x months after the date on 
which such an act was done or action taken.
22 
 
Chapter-2 
Provisions Relating to Legal Persons 
42. Legal person to acquire competency: (1) A body corporate 
incorporated pursuant to law sha ll obtain legal pe rsonality, and 
obtain legal competency in the same capacity.  
(2) In order to obtain lega l competency pur suant to sub-
section (1), any body shall be re gistered in accord ance with law. 
(3) Except where a separate provision has been made by 
law for registration pursuant to su b-section (2), an application shall 
be made to the competent author ity, setting out the following 
matters: 
(a) Name of the body corporate, 
(b) Head office of the body corporate, and address of 
such office, 
(c) Objectives and functions  of the body corporate, 
(d) Details of the capital st ructure, if any, of the body 
corporate, 
(e) Other necessary details. 
(4) After the registration of  a body corporat e pursuant to 
sub-section (2), such a body sh all be deemed to have been 
incorporated. 
(5) A legal person shall have a corporate personality and 
use a separate seal for its activities. 
(6) A body incorporated pursuant to this Section shall be 
an autonomous and body  corporate with perp etual succession, and
23 
 
may, in the same capacity, subject to  law, carry out as a person the 
following functions: 
(a) To acquire, hold, earn, po ssess, dispose off, sell or 
otherwise manage a property,  
(b) To execute a contract, ex ercise rights and discharge 
obligations under the contract or to assume any kind 
of right or obligation in any other way, 
(c) To frame statute or bye-l aws required to operate its 
own functions, proceed ings or business, 
(d) To appoint necessary employees based on law to 
carry out its functions, 
  Provided that the comm issions, inst itutions or 
bodies referred to in clause  (g) of Section 44 shall 
not be allowed to appoint employees. 
(e) To open branches or ot her offices, su bject to its 
statute and bye-laws, 
(f) To open an account  in a bank or fi nancial institution 
and to operate the account, 
(g) To carry out other fu nctions according to law. 
(7) A legal person may sue or initiate other legal action 
and may also be sued or subjected to other legal action by its name. 
43. To obtain legal compet ency upon incorporation:  (1) A legal 
person shall, upon it s incorporation, obtain legal competency to 
carry out civil and commercial acts and transactions, in addition to 
the acts mentioned in Section 42.
24 
 
(2) The legal competency obta ined pursuant to sub-section 
(1) shall continue to exist unt il the legal person is liquidated, 
dissolved or wounded up in accordance with law. 
44. Legal competency d eemed to be acquired, ipso facto : 
Notwithstanding anything containe d in Section 42, the following 
body, as a legal person, shall be deemed to have, ipso facto,  
obtained competency: 
(a) The State of Nepal, 
(b) The Government of Nepal, 
(c) The Federal Parliament or Legislature-Parliament, 
(d) A court, constituti onal body or any office 
thereunder, 
(e) A Ministry, Secretaria t, Department of the 
Government of Nepal and any other government 
office,  
(f) A Province, 
(g) The Province Government or Provincial level 
Government offices, 
(h) A Provincial Assembly, 
(i) A Rural Municipality, Municipality or District 
Assembly or Local Leve l government office under 
such a body,  
(j) A commission, committee or similar other body set 
up in accordance with law by the Government of
25 
 
Nepal, Provincial Gove rnment or Local Level 
Government, 
(k) A corporation, corporat e body or body set up in 
accordance with law, 
(l) Any organization established for public purpose 
such as a shrine, temple, deity place, Chaitya, 
monastery, mosque, chur ch, public rest house, 
public inn, and graveyar d remained in operation 
from the time immemorial and in possession of a 
property, 
(k) A community school, college or university 
established for public purpose. 
45. Address of locati on of legal person:  The address of location of a 
legal person shall be as specified at the time of  incorporation of the 
body corporate, and where such address is not so  specified, the 
address where its headquarters or registered office is located and 
where such office or ad dress also is not speci fied, the address where 
the main administrative office or transaction and business of such a 
body corporate is located  shall be considered to be its address of 
location.  
46. Management and operation of legal person:  (1) A legal person 
shall, except as otherwise prov ided by law, be managed and 
operated in accordance with the provis ions set forth in  the statute of 
such a person, and wher e such provisions is not made, it shall be 
managed and operated by one or more directors.
26 
 
(2) The legal person shal l be responsible for the 
management and operation made by the director or directors 
pursuant to sub-section (1). 
47. Operation of busin ess of legal person:  (1) In operating business 
on behalf of a legal person, the bu siness shall, except as otherwise 
provided by law, be operated by the decision of dir ectors of such a 
person. 
(2) In operating business pursua nt to sub-section (1), the 
director may delegate powers to any director or other person to 
operate any business. 
48. Right or liability to devolve upon merger of legal person:  (1) If a 
legal person is, for any reason, me rged with another legal person, 
the right or liability of such person  shall be as specified at the time 
of such merger. 
(2) If not specified pursuant to sub-section (1), the right or 
liability of the legal person to be  merged shall devolve on the legal 
person with which such  a person is merged. 
49. Legal person may become agent:  A legal person may, subject to 
law, act as an agent of any other person. 
50. Not to participate in decision -making in case of conflict of 
interest: (1) A member or dir ector of any body or  institution shall 
not take part in the decision ma king process on a matter involving 
his or her personal interest.  
(2) If a decision is affected by the conflict of interest under 
sub-section (1), such a decision shall be void.
27 
 
51. Legal person to be liable:  If a loss or damage is caused to a person 
from an act done and action taken by  a person on be half of a legal 
person, such a legal person shall be liable and bear compensation 
therefor. 
   Provided that if any loss is caused by doing an act beyond the 
objective or competency  of the legal person or dishonestly, the 
director or a person doing such act shall personally be liable 
therefor. 
52. Assets or liabilit y to be settled:  If a legal person is dissolved for 
any reason, the assets an d liabilities of such a person shall be settled 
in accordance with law. 
53. Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or 
action taken under this Chapter ma y make a lawsuit within three 
months after the date of knowledge of such an act or action in the 
cases of Section 50 and within si x months after the date on which 
such an act was done or acti on taken, in the other cases.
28 
 
Chapter-3 
Provisions Relating to Bank ruptcy of Natural Persons 
54. Bankruptcy proceedings may be initiated:  (1) If a person’s debts 
and other liabilitie s to be borne by him or  her exceed his or her 
assets, bankruptcy pr oceedings may be ini tiated for payment or 
recovery of debts or settlement of  liabilities from such assets.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
no bankruptcy proceedings may be  initiated in the following 
circumstances: 
(a) If a person who has regula r income or is certain to 
earn income in the future  proves that his or her 
income can pay or set off debts or other liabilities in 
a certain period or  the creditor is satisfied in such 
matter, 
(b) If a person likely to be a bankrupt asks for a period 
of up to five years specify ing the period of time to 
repay the debts of creditors and sources thereof 
from the date of origin of  conditions necessitating 
the commencement of bank ruptcy proceedings in 
order to enjoin or cause to be enjoined from 
initiating that proceedings, 
(c) If the creditor does not agr ee to initiate, or cause to 
be initiated, bank ruptcy proceedings. 
 Explanation:  
(1)   For the purposes of  this Chapter, the term 
"assets" means the concer ned person's property
29 
 
standing for the time bein g or to be earned or 
likely to be earned up to the time prior to the 
completion of bankruptc y proceedings pursuant 
to this Chapter. 
(2) For the purposes of clause (c), the term 
"creditor" means, where there are more  than one 
creditor, creditors or a group of creditors who 
hold fifty percent or more  debts out of the total 
debts of the person likely to become bankrupt. 
(3) If a debt or claim of a cred itor is settled from the assets 
of a person under this Chapter, su ch a person shall be deemed to 
become a bankrupt.  
(4) The court shall send the record of the person being 
bankrupt pursuant to sub-section (3) to the bankruptcy 
administration office established for that purpose. 
(5) The bankruptcy administra tion office shall update the 
records referred to in sub-section (4). 
(6) Any person declared bankru pt pursuant to sub-section 
(3) shall not be required to repay de bt or fulfill the obligation other 
than the debt or obligation he or sh e has to pay or fulfill and settle 
under this Chapter. 
(7) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (6), 
the following obligation shall be fulfilled from the trade, business 
or transaction he or she starts af ter his or her declaration of being 
bankrupt:
30 
 
(a) Tax, fee or charge to be  paid to the Government of 
Nepal, Province Government or Local 
Government 
(b) Amount of penalty or fine  to be paid according to 
the order of a court, 
(c) Amount to be paid for the embezzlement of 
property of the pers on under his or her 
guardianship or curatorship, 
(d) Amount to be paid for the goods stolen, 
(e) Amount to be paid for the embezzlement of 
property of a trust. 
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, if any person becomes ba nkrupt, he or she may carry on 
any trade, business or transaction other than any act or activity he 
or she is prohibited fr om doing or taking in  that capacity according 
to law. 
55. Petition to be filed to initiate ba nkruptcy proceedings:  (1) A 
person who is likely to  become a bankrupt ma y himself or herself, 
or a creditor or group of creditor s having claim of at least twenty-
five percent or more of the tota l debts if the amount of debts is 
disclosed and, if the amount of debt s is not disclosed, a creditor or 
group of creditors having claim of  more than five  hundred thousand 
rupees borrowed by such a person, may file a petition in the court, 
in order to initiate bankruptcy proceedings.
31 
 
(2) In filing a petition by a person likely to become a 
bankrupt for bankruptcy pursuant to sub-section (1), the petition 
shall specify the following details: 
(a) Actual statement of his or  her total assets and value 
thereof, 
(b) Statement of total amount of debts borrowed by 
him or her, interest accrue d thereon and details of 
the creditor or creditors having lent such debts, 
along with their addresses, 
(c) If he or she has to disc harge other liabilities, details 
thereof, 
(d) The reason for the fail ure to repay or discharge 
debts and other liabilities. 
(3) In filing a petition by a creditor or group  of creditors 
for bankruptcy pursuant to sub-sect ion (1), the petition shall specify 
the following details: 
(a) Evidence indicating that the borrower is likely to 
be a bankrupt, 
(b) Statement of the asse ts of the borrower and 
approximate value thereof,  to the extent of the 
petitioner's knowledge, 
 (c) Statement of the petit ioner’s claim, and if the 
petitioner has knowledge of other creditor's debt 
or claim, such debt or claim, 
 (d) Details including addr esses of the creditors.
32 
 
(4) Prior to filing a petition pursuant to  sub-section (1) to 
initiate bankruptcy pr oceedings, a creditor or  group of creditors 
shall give a notice to the borrower indicating that the borrower shall 
repay his or her debts or discharge other liabilities within a period 
of at least three months  and that in the event of failure to repay the 
debts within that period, a petitio n shall be filed in the court to 
initiate bankrupt cy proceedings. 
56. Notice to be given to creditor:  (1) If a petition is filed by a 
borrower pursuant to Section 55 to initiate bankrup tcy proceedings, 
the court shall is sue a notice of thirty-five days and serve the same 
on the creditor or group of creditors whose debts the borrower has 
specified as due and pa yable and publish  the notice in any national 
daily newspaper. 
(2) The notice to be publishe d pursuant to su b-section (1) 
shall also contain a statement invi ting any other person having any 
type of claim, if any, over the a ssets of the person whose assets is 
under bankruptcy proceedings to  make a claim with evidence 
within the time-limit as  specified in the same sub-section. 
(3) The claim made within the time-limit referred to in 
sub-section (1) or (2) by the creditor or grou p of creditors or by 
other person shall be considered to  be the final claim made against 
the assets of the borrower, and the bankruptcy proceedings of his or 
her assets shall commence on the same basis. 
57. Notice to be given to borrower:   (1) If a petition is filed by a 
creditor or group of creditors pursua nt to Section 55 to initiate the 
bankruptcy proceedings of the a ssets of the borrower, the court 
shall serve a notice, along with a time-limit of thirty-five days, on
33 
 
the borrower to appear before the court, along with a reply whether 
or not the bankruptcy proceedings require to be instituted, and if 
there exists any grou nd for not institut ing the bankruptcy 
proceedings, and ev idence thereof. 
(2) If a notice is served on the borrower pursuant to sub-
section (1), a notice shall be given to the other creditor or claimant 
to submit a claim in that respect wi thin a period of thirty-five days 
and such a notice shall be pu blished in any national daily 
newspaper.  
(3) The claim of a person who fails to submit a claim 
within the period referred to in sub-section (2) sh all not be valid 
after that period.  
(4) The fee to be incurred in  publishing a notice in a 
national daily newspape r pursuant to sub-sect ion (2) or sub-section 
(1) of Section 56 shall be recove red from the concerned petitioner. 
(5) The fee recovered pursuant  to sub-section (4) may be 
awarded to be paid by the debtor  in the course of bankruptcy. 
58. Order to be given to initia te bankruptcy proceedings:  (1) If a 
petition is filed in the court pursua nt to Section 55 to initiate the 
bankruptcy proceedings, the court shall make or der as to whether it 
would be appropriate to initiate  the bankruptcy proceedings in 
respect of that petition or not. 
(2) If an order is made to  initiate the bankruptcy 
proceedings pursuant to  sub-section (1), the court shall, at the 
request of the person likely to b ecome bankrupt himself or herself 
or of the creditor, orde r any other family memb er of such a person
34 
 
to maintain status quo of the a ssets of the person in respect of 
whose assets the bankru ptcy proceedings are to commence, for the 
purpose of bankruptcy. 
(3) If the  court thinks that the assets of the person likely to 
be bankrupt may be em bezzled or may not be properly managed if 
such a person or his or her family  member is allowed to manage the 
assets, the court may, on the basis of the petition by the party or suo 
motu, entrust the responsibility for management of such assets to 
any of the following persons: 
(a) A person licensed as bankruptcy professional 
pursuant to law, 
(b) A bankruptcy trustee ap pointed pursuant to law, 
(c) The concerned ward comm ittee of the Local Level, 
(d) Such an officer empl oyee of the court or law 
practitioner as designated by the court. 
(4) The Local Level, trustee or  person designated pursuant 
to sub-section (3) sha ll manage the assets of the person likely to 
become bankrupt, in accordance with the or der of the court. 
59. Transaction to be, ipso facto, stayed or void: (1) If a court makes 
an order, pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 58, to initiate the 
bankruptcy proceedings in relation to the assets of a person, any of 
the following acts cannot be carried out after th e making of such an 
order, and if any of such acts ha s already commenced or is being 
carried out but not comple ted, such act shall, ipso facto, be stayed: 
(a) To transfer in any manner to any person the title to, 
bail, pledge, mortgage or to lease or rent in any
35 
 
manner for a period exceedin g one year, the assets 
of a person who is likely to become bankrupt, 
(b) To attach, or execute th e pledge, mortgage of, the 
assets of the person likely to become bankrupt 
pursuant to the judgment of a court, 
(c) To repay debt or discharg e liability of any creditor 
from the assets of the pers on likely to be bankrupt. 
(2) Any deed, contract , dealing, transaction or arrangement 
executed in contravention of the pr ovision set forth in sub-section 
(1) shall, ipso facto be deemed to have been void. 
60. Opportunity to be provided  to reconcile sum of debts:  (1) If the 
court has made an order to comme nce the bankrupt cy proceedings 
pursuant to sub-section (1) of Sec tion 58, the Local Level, trustee or 
person, as the case may be entruste d with responsibility to manage 
property pursuant to sub-section (3 ) of the same Section shall, after 
the assets, debts and othe r liabilities of the bo rrower are ascertained, 
call a meeting of the debtors, creditors or other claimants. 
(2) In the meeting called pursu ant to sub-section (1), the 
creditor or claimant shall be prov ided with a reas onable opportunity 
to waive his or her claim wholly or partly from a ll or any of the 
assets of the borrower or to reconcile sum by taking amount lesser 
than his or her claim, by mutual  understanding between the person 
likely to become bankrupt and th e creditor or other claimant. 
(3) In making reconciliation  of sum pursuant to sub-
section (2), an arrangement may be so made that a creditor pays the
36 
 
debt or claim of some or most creditors and submits a lump sum 
claim against su ch a person. 
(4) If the parties reach mutual  understanding pursuant to 
sub-section (2) or (3) or the c oncerned parties agree, for any 
reasons, to stay the bankruptcy proceedings  for the time being, a 
joint petition may be  filed in the court accordingly. 
(5) If a petition is filed fo r staying the bankruptcy 
proceedings pursuant to sub-section (4), the court shall make an 
order to stay as requested the ba nkruptcy proceedin gs for a period 
not exceeding the period set forth in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of 
Section 54. 
(6) If an order is made purs uant to sub-section (5), the 
bankruptcy proceedings in respect of the asse ts of such a person 
cannot be instituted until the expiry of that period. 
61. Priority order of pa ying debt or liability:  (1) In carrying out or 
causing to be carried out the bank ruptcy proceedings  of the assets 
of a person pursuant to this Chap ter, the debts to be paid or 
liabilities to be discharged by such  a person shall be settled, on the 
basis of the following priority or der, from the assets of such a 
person:  
(a) Costs incurred in the carry ing out of the bankruptcy 
proceedings, 
(b) The liability of the secured creditor, who has 
provided debt against a pl edge or mortgage, to the 
extent of such pledge or mortgage,
37 
 
(c) Tax, fine to be paid to  the Government of Nepal, 
Province Government or Local Government or 
other government charges and dues, 
(d) Debts of the creditors othe r than those referred to in 
clause (b), 
(e) Claim of the claimants ot her than those referred to 
in clause (b), (c) or (d). 
(2) In paying or setting off de bts or liabilities pursuant to 
sub-section (1), if ther e are more than one cred itor or claimant of 
the same priority order, the debt or claim shall be paid or set off pro 
rata basis from the assets bankrupt ed in proportion to the debt or 
claim of each credit or or claimant. 
(3) In paying the debts of the secured creditors pursuant to 
clause (b) of sub-section (1), if, after recovery of his or her debts 
from the assets pledged or mortga ged to him or her, there remains 
any portion or sum of such pledge  or mortgage, other creditors or 
claimants may make claim over such portion or sum. 
Provided that if th e secured creditor's debts cannot be fully 
recovered from such a ssets, he or she cannot claim other property. 
62. Debt of creditor who shows ex cess debt not to receive priority:  
Notwithstanding anything containe d in sub-section (1) of Section 
61, if it is held that, by a coll usion between a person likely to 
become a bankrupt and any creditor, and being guided by a 
malafide motive to cause loss to an other creditor or claimant, more 
debts or claims have been show n from any transaction which has 
never happened nor been carried on, the debt or liability of such a
38 
 
creditor shall be paid or set off onl y after the debt or liability of 
other creditor or claimant is satisfied. 
63. Property to be set aside: (1) Prior to effectin g bankruptcy of the 
assets of a person pursuant to th is Chapter, the following property 
shall be set aside and the bankruptcy proceedin gs shall be carried 
out from the remaining assets:  
(a) Any property that remains as the personal property 
of a person other than one who is likely to become 
a bankrupt, 
(b) Clothes up to three pa irs and shoes up to three 
pairs being worn or to be  worn by the person who 
is likely to become ba nkrupt and an undivided 
family member of that person,  
(c) One set of cooking and dining utensils, pots and 
cups, one set of bedding materials and reasonable 
number of furniture requ ired for the undivided 
family member of the pe rson likely to become a 
bankrupt, 
(d) Medicines and health-rel ated equipment required 
to the person likely to become a bankrupt and the 
undivided family member of that person,  
(e) Books necessary to ca rry out study and teaching,  
(f) Food necessary for subs istence for a period not 
exceeding three months to the persons referred to 
in clause (b),
39 
 
(g) One set of tools or instruments related to the 
profession and employment of the persons referred 
to in clause (b).  
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in clause (b), (c), 
(d), (e), (f) or (g) of sub-section (1), the total value of the properties 
referred to in these clauses shall no t exceed one hundred thousand 
rupees. 
64. Assets not to be concealed:  (1) A person w ho files a petition 
pursuant to Section 55 for commenc ing the bankrupt cy proceedings 
of his or her assets shall submit an exact inventory of his or her 
total assets. 
(2) In submitting an inventory pursuant to su b-section (1), 
if he or she hides or conceals such assets with mala fide intention of 
causing loss or damage to the creditor, a sepa rate lawsuit may be 
instituted against him or her. 
(3) If assets are hidden or concealed pursuant to sub-
section (1), and such assets are di scovered before the completion of 
the bankruptcy proceedings, the proceedings referred to in sub-
section (2) of Section 61 shall be carried ou t in respect of the 
creditor and the claimant  having so discovered the assets and the 
other creditor and claimant as well. 
(4) If any creditor or clai mant discovers any assets 
pursuant to sub-section (3) after the completion of the bankruptcy 
proceedings, ten percent amount of th e assets so discovered shall be 
provided to the creditor or claimant who has so discovered the 
assets if such credit or or claimant has already satisfied the sum
40 
 
according to his or her claim at the time of bankruptcy proceedings, 
and if his or her claim has not been so satisfied, his or her sum shall 
be caused to be satisfied from such  assets and the remaining assets 
shall be distributed pursuant to the said sub-section to the other 
creditors and claimants. 
Provided that if th e creditor or claimant  is the successor or 
relative of the bankrupt person, he  or she shall not be entitled to 
such facility. 
(5) If the assets hidden or concealed pursuant to sub-
section (2) remain after payment to the creditor or claimant 
pursuant to sub-section (4), such assets shall be returned to the 
concerned person. 
65. Status of bankruptcy  to be terminated: (1) The status of a 
bankrupt person falling under ba nkruptcy shall remain for a period 
of twelve years from the date on wh ich he or she became a bankrupt.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if a bankrupt person pays all liabi lities payable to the creditors at 
the time of bankruptcy, he or she may file a petition in the court to 
terminate the status of bankruptcy along with the evidence thereof.  
(3) The court shall make an order to summon the presence 
of all creditors who were  either partially paid  or unpaid at the time 
of bankruptcy of such a person within a period of fifteen days, 
excluding the time requir ed for journey, to have a hearing on the 
petition filed pursuant  to sub-section (2). 
(4) If, in hearing the petition filed pursuant to sub-section 
(2), it appears that the bankrupt person has satisfied all the debts
41 
 
and liabilities remained unpaid at the time of bankruptcy, the court 
may annul the order made at the time of his or her bankruptcy.  
(5) If an order is annulled pursu ant to sub-section (4), the 
status of the bankrupt person shal l be deemed have been terminated 
after one year from the date of the annulment of such an order. 
66. Statute of limitation:  A person aggrieved fr om any act done or 
action taken pursuant to this Chapte r may make a lawsuit within the 
following period from the date of accrual of the cause of action for 
the commencement of the bankruptcy proceedings: 
(a) In matters under Section 54, within three years from 
the date of accrual of the cause of action, 
(b) In matters under Sections 62 and 64, within two years 
from the date of knowledge thereof, 
(c) In the matters other than t hose referred to in clauses (a) 
and (b), within six mont hs from the date of 
commission of such an act or action.
42 
 
Part-3 
Family Law 
Chapter-1 
Provisions Relating to Marriage 
67. Marriage deemed to be concluded:  If a man and a woman accept 
each other as the husband and wife  through any occasion, ceremony, 
formal or other act, a marriage shall be d eemed to have been 
concluded. 
68. Marriage to be inviol able social bond: (1)  Marriage shall be a 
permanent, inviolable and holy social and legal bond, which is 
based on free consent and establishe d to start conjugal and family 
life between a man and a woman.  
(2) The marital bond referred to  in sub-section (1) shall 
subsist until exti nguished pursuant to Section 82. 
69. Freedom of marriage:   (1) Every person shall,  subject to law, have 
the freedom to conclude a marriage , establish a family and spend a 
conjugal life. 
(2) A marriage must be made, or caused to be made, public 
irrespective of the manner us ed to conclude it.   
(3) Every person's family li fe shall be inviolable. 
70. Marriage may be concluded:  (1) Subject to this Chapter, a 
marriage may be concluded between a man and a woman on the 
following conditions: 
(a) If the man and the wo man agree to accept each 
other as husband and wife,
43 
 
(b) If the man and the wo man are not relatives, 
punishable by law on incest, 
(c) If matrimonial relationsh ip of both the man and the 
woman does not exist,  
(d) If both have attained  twenty years of age. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of 
sub-section (1), nothing shall ba r the conclusion, or causing the 
conclusion of, a marriage within th e relationship that is allowed to 
marry in accordance with the practi ces prevailing in  their ethnic 
community or clan. 
71. Marriage not to be concluded:  (1) No one shall conclude, or cause 
to be concluded, marr iage with a man or a woman, as the case may 
be, who is not in a condition wh ere marriage can be concluded 
pursuant to Section 70. 
(2) No one shall conclude, or  cause to be concluded, 
marriage with a man or a woman on any of the following conditions, 
by way of misrepresentation: 
(a) One who has contracted human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) or Hepatitis 'B' or similar other 
incurable severe disease, 
(b) One who has already been proved to have no sexual 
organ, to be impotent or to have no reproductive 
capability, 
(c) One who is dumb or has lost hearing capacity, 
being fully blind or is suffering from leprosy,
44 
 
(d) One who is of unsound mind, 
(e) One who is already a married,  
(f) One who is a pregnant, 
(g) One who has been convic ted of a criminal offense 
involving moral turpitude by a court and sentenced 
for the same. 
(3) A person who is aggrieve d from the conclusion of 
marriage by way of misrepresentatio n pursuant to sub-section (2) 
may get such a marriage voide d and claim a reasonable 
compensation from th e person who conclude s, or causes to be 
concluded, marriage by misrepresentation. 
72. Marriage to be void: (1) A marriage concluded on any of the 
following conditions shall, ipso facto, be void: 
(a) A marriage concluded without consent of the 
man or the woman, 
(b) A marriage concluded between the relatives, 
punishable by law on incest. 
(c) Marriage against Section 70(1) (d). 
(d) Another marriage concluded by a man or woman 
whilst the current marita l relationship is still 
prevalent except in th e situation of being 
separated by taking partition according to law. 
(2) A marriage concluded pursua nt to sub-section (1) shall 
be invalid ab initio.
45 
 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of 
sub-section (1), a marriage conclude d pursuant to sub-section (2) of 
Section 70 shall not be void. 
73. Voidable marriage:  (1) If a marriage is co ncluded in any of the 
following circumstances and a ny person who conc ludes such a 
marriage does not accept it, the pers on may get such a marriage 
voided:  
(a) Deleted 
(b) If the marriage has been co ncluded, or caused to be 
concluded, by way of misrepresentation pursuant to 
sub-section (2) of Section 71. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
a marriage shall be void only with  the consent of the woman if she 
is pregnant or has delivered a baby as the cons equence of the 
marriage. 
74. Marriage to be deemed concluded if child is born from physical 
intercourse: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(2) of Section 69, if a woman is pr oved to have delivered a child by 
conceiving pregnancy from phys ical intercourse with a man, 
marriage between such a man and a woman shall, ipso  facto,  be 
deemed to have been concluded. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
no marriage shall be deemed to have been concluded between a 
man and a woman in any of the following circumstances even if a 
child is born from physical intercourse with the man:
46 
 
(a) If a woman gives birth to a child by conceiving 
pregnancy as the consequence of rape, 
(b) Except in case of the re lationship of under sub-
section (2) of Section 70, if a woman delivers a 
child by conceiving preg nancy from a physical 
intercourse with a man w ithin the relationship 
punishable by law on incest. 
(c)  If the age of marriage is not complete according to 
part (d) of subsection 1 of section 70. 
(d) If there is situation which causes polygamy. 
75. No lawful rights of child al ready born to be prejudiced:  There 
shall be no prejudice in the lawful rights of  a child already born 
from a marriage if the marriage b ecomes void pursuant to Section 
72 or the marriage is got voided pu rsuant to Section 73 or of the 
child born in any of the circumst ance referred to in  sub-section (2) 
of Section 74. 
76. Marriage to be registered:  (1) Both husband and wife shall get 
their marriage registered by filing  an application in the authority 
appointed as per law. 
Provided that in the circumstan ce referred to in sub-section 
(1) of Section 74, both or either of husband and wife may file an 
application for the registration of marriage. 
(2) A husband and wife residing outside Nepal may file an 
application for the registration of marriage in the Nepali embassy or 
consulate general located  in the country in which they have been 
residing.
47 
 
(3) If an application is filed pursuant to sub- section (1) or 
(2) for the registration of a marria ge, the concerned authority shall, 
after registering the marriage in the marriage book maintained in 
the office, issue the marriage regi stration certificate, in the form 
according to prevailing laws , to the applicant, w ithin fifteen days of 
the filing of the application.  
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter, the term 
"concerned authority" means the marriage registering authority. 
(4) If the marriage cannot be registered according to the 
application filed pursuant to sub-s ection (1) or (2), the concerned 
authority shall give the applicant informat ion, specifying the 
reasons therefor, w ithin seven days of the fi ling of the application. 
(5) If any one party does not a ppear for the registration of 
a marriage according to th e application filed purs uant to the proviso 
to sub-section (1), the concerne d authority shall register the 
marriage after inquiring into such a party. 
(6) If, in making inquiry purs uant to sub-section (5), the 
other party expresses disagreement to the registration of marriage, 
the concerned authority shall not register the marriage and inform 
the applicant that the decision on that matte r shall be made as 
decided by the court. 
(7) The concerned authority shall safely maintain the 
records of the details of the regi stration of marriage under this 
Section. 
(8) If a couple who have alr eady concluded marriage prior 
to the commencement of this Act but have not registered the
48 
 
marriage may, if they so desire , get their marriage registered 
pursuant to this Section. 
Provided that the marriage of  such a couple shall not be 
deemed to be legally invalid merely for the reason that such 
marriage is not registered. 
77. Marriage by registration:  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in sub-section (2) of Section 69 and Section 74, if a man and a 
woman desire to conclude marriage by registration, they shall file 
an application in the c oncerned District Court, if they are in Nepal, 
and in the Nepali embassy or consul ate general, if they are outside 
Nepal, specifying therein their name, surname, age, address, 
profession, name of their father, mother, grand-fath er, grand-mother, 
whether previously married or not,  if married, the details of the 
dissolution of marriage and also the name of at least two witnesses. 
(2) In order to file an appli cation pursuant to sub-section 
(1), either the man or the woman or both must have resided since at 
least fifteen days ago in  the concerned district if the application has 
to be filed in the District Court, an d, if the application is to be filed 
in the embassy or consulate general, in the country in which such an 
embassy or a consulate general is situated. 
78. Decision to be made as to whether marriage is capable of being 
concluded: (1) If an application is file d pursuant to Section 77 for 
the conclusion of a marriage by  registration, the concerned 
authority shall make, after making necessary inquiry, a decision 
within seven days of th e filing of the applicatio n, as to whether or 
not the marriage is capa ble of being concluded.
49 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if the concerned authority based in  a foreign country has suspicion 
about the proposed marri age, the authority sh all submit the matter 
to the Government of Nepal and settle the matter according to the 
decision of the Government of Nepal. 
79. Deed of consent to be prepared:  If a decision is made pursuant to 
Section 78 to the effect  that marriage is capab le of being concluded 
between the applicants, the concerne d authority shall prepare a deed 
of consent for marriage, also reco rding the matters specified in the 
application and a statem ent to the effect that  the parties to the 
marriage have consente d to accept each other as husband and wife, 
cause the contracting parties and witnesses present to affix their 
signature and thumb impression on th e deed in his or her presence 
and also sign the deed. 
80. Provisions relating to reg istration of marriage:  (1) After the 
deed of consent has been signe d pursuant to Section 79, the 
concerned authority shall register such a marriage in  the registration 
book, which has to be signed by su ch an authority and also by the 
parties to the marriage and witnesses present. 
(2) Once the marriage is register ed pursuant to sub-section 
(1), the concerned authority sh all issue a marriage registration 
certificate, in the form according to prevailing laws, to the parties to 
the marriage registration. 
(3) Marriage shall be deemed  to have been concluded 
between the applicants from th e date on which the marriage 
registration certificate is obtain ed pursuant to sub-section (2).
50 
 
81. Provision relating to use of surname by married woman:  (1) A 
married woman may, after marriage , use the surnam e used by her 
father or mother or  the surname of her husband or both the 
surnames. 
(2) If a question arises as to the surname of a married 
woman, except as otherw ise proved, she shall be deemed to have 
used the surname of her husband. 
(3) If the marriage of a woma n who has used the surname 
of her husband is dissolved, she ma y, if she so desires, use the 
surname used by her father or mother. 
82. Matrimonial relationship deemed to be terminated:  In any of the 
following circumstances, the matr imonial relationship between the 
husband and the wife shall be d eemed to have been terminated: 
(a) If marriage is annulled purs uant to Section 72 or 73,  
(b) If marriage is dissolve d according to law between 
husband and wife, 
(c) If the wife concludes anot her marriage before effecting 
divorce pursuant to law. 
83. Re-marriage may be concluded:  Notwithstanding anything 
contained elsewhere in  this Chapter, a man or a woman may re-
marry in any of the following circumstances: 
(a) If the matrimonial relati onship between husband and 
wife is terminated pu rsuant to Section 82, 
(b) If husband or wife dies, 
(c) If husband and wife are separated upon partition in 
accordance with law.
51 
 
84. Statute of limitation:  A person aggrieved fr om any act done or 
action taken under this Chapter ma y make a lawsuit within three 
months after the date on which such  act was done or action taken.
52 
 
Chapter-2 
Provisions Relating to Co nsequences of Marriage 
85. To be considered  husband and wife:  After the conclusion of 
marriage between a man and a woman, they shall, so long as such 
matrimonial relationshi p subsists, be cons idered each other's 
husband and wife. 
86. Relation and obligati on of husband and wife:   (1) The husband 
and wife must have mutu al love and good faith. 
(2) The husband and wife must establish and spend 
conjugal life by living together , except as otherwise arranged 
through mutual understanding. 
(3) The husband and wife must  help, protect and respect 
each other. 
87. Husband's home to be  considered residence : Except where a 
separate residence is fixed by mu tual understanding of the husband 
and wife, the husband's home shall be considered to  be the wife’s 
residence. 
88. To be considered ea ch other's agent:  Except as otherwise 
provided for in the la w or except where ther e is a legal dispute 
between the husband and wife, th e husband and wife shall be 
considered as each  other's agent in the ge neral household affairs. 
89. To provide, or cause to be prov ided, maintenance in accordance 
with reputation:  The husband and wife sh all provide, or cause to 
be provided, maintenance cost and health care to each other 
according to their repu tation and capacity.
53 
 
90. Household affairs to be  managed by consent:  (1) The husband 
and wife of an undivided family shall manage the household affairs 
by mutual consent accord ing to their property, income and capacity. 
(2) Except as otherwise provid ed in the law, the husband 
or wife shall obtain each other's consent in selling or otherwise 
transferring a prop erty registered in  his or her name. 
91. Not to preclude from exercisi ng profession, business or 
occupation: The husband or wife or any member of the family 
shall not preclude each other from exercising a profession, business 
or occupation of thei r respective skill, qualification or ability. 
92. Statute of limitation:  A person aggrieved fr om any act done or 
action taken under this Chapter ma y make a lawsuit within three 
months after the date on which su ch an act was done or action was 
taken.
54 
 
Chapter-3 
Provisions Relating to Divorce 
93. Divorce may be effected  by consent of both:  If both the husband 
and wife so desire, they may divo rce the relationsh ip of husband 
and wife at any time. 
94. Husband may effect divorce:  The husband may effect divorce in 
any of the following circumstances  even without consent of the 
wife: 
(a) Except where the husb and and wife are living 
separately after obtaining  their partition share or 
separating bread and board  in accordance wi th law, if 
the wife has been living separately for three or more 
consecutive years, without consent of the husband, 
(b) If the wife deprives the husband of maintenance costs 
or expels him from the house, 
(c) If the wife commits an act or  conspiracy likely to cause 
the grievous hurt or other se vere physical or mental 
pain to the husband,inher 
(d) If the wife is proved to have made sexual relation with 
another person. 
95. Wife may effect divorce:  The wife may effect divorce in any of the 
following circumstances, even wi thout consent of  the husband: 
(a) Except where the husb and and wife are living 
separately after obtaining  their partition share or 
separating bread and board in  accordance with law, if
55 
 
the husband has been living separately for three years 
or more consecutively, without consent of the wife, 
(b) If the husband deprives th e wife of maintenance costs 
or expels her from home, 
(c) If the husband commits an ac t or conspiracy likely to 
cause grievous hurt or other severe physical or mental 
pain to the wife, 
(d) If the husband concl udes another marriage, 
(e) If the husband is proved to have made sexual 
intercourse with another woman, 
(f) If the husband is proved  to have raped the wife. 
96. Petition to be filed for divorce:  The husband or wife, as the case 
may be, desiring to get the relationshi p divorced shall file a petition 
in the concerned district court. 
97. Mediation to be made between husba nd and wife:  If a petition is 
filed for divorce pursuant to Sec tion 96, the court shall, to the 
extent possible, remind and convin ce both the parties and conciliate 
them.  
98. Divorce to be effected:  If the court fails to make conciliation 
between the husband and wife even  after reminding and convincing 
them pursuant to Section 97 a nd deems appropriate to get the 
relationship divorced rath er than to continue it any longer, the court 
shall effect divorce between them. 
  Provided that if the husban d and wife do not agree to 
conciliate between th em despite being reminded and convinced by
56 
 
the court to that effect, the court shall effect divorce after one year 
of the filing of the petition.  
99. Partition of property to  be effected before divorce : (1) If divorce 
is to be effected because of the husband, the concerned court shall, 
if the wife so demands, cause part ition to be effe cted between the 
husband and wife before  effecting divorce. 
  (2) If a petition is filed by  the wife for divorce on the 
ground referred to in clause (b), (c), (d), (e) or (f) of Section 95, 
divorce is deemed to be effected  because of the husband, for the 
purposes of sub-section (1). 
(3) If a property in common is registered in the name of 
both husband and wife or either of  them, then such property shall be 
partitioned between them accordi ng to law, prior to effecting 
divorce.  
(4) If the husband himself has not obtained partition from 
his father or other coparceners, th e court shall, by causing both the 
parties to disclose the copar ceners, and if there are other 
coparceners who are entitled to partition, by inquiring such 
coparceners as well, cause partitio n to be apportioned between the 
husband and wife.  
(5) If it appears that it may take a long time to effect 
partition pursuant to sub-section (1),  (3) or (4), the court may effect 
divorce between the husband and wife and order the husband to 
provide the wife with monthly expe nses as alimony according to the 
property and income of  the husband until the partition is effected.
57 
 
Provided that if such a wo man concludes another marriage 
before effecting partition, she sh all not be entitled to a partition 
share. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, if a petition is  filed for divorce on the ground referred to in 
clause (b), (c) or (d ) of Section 94 , the husband shall not be 
compelled to provide partition share or alimony to the wife 
pursuant to this Chapter.  
100. Order to pay lump sum amount or alimony:  Notwithstanding 
anything contained in Section 99, if the wife  who effects divorce 
desires to obtain from the husban d a lump sum amount or annual or 
monthly alimony or expense, inst ead of the partition share, the 
court may order the husband to pr ovide such a wife with a lump 
sum amount or annual or monthly alimony or expense on the basis 
of his property or income. 
Provided that if such a wife concludes another marriage, it is 
not required to provide such amount or alimony. 
101. Order to provid e maintenance costs:  If the wife, who has not 
obtained partition from the husband for there being no property for 
partition under Section 99, desire s to receive maintenance costs 
from the husband and the husband has income, the Court may order 
the husband to provide maintenance costs to the wife according to 
the income of the divorced husband.  
Provided that: 
(1)  If such a wife concludes another marriage, it is not 
required to provide such costs,
58 
 
(2) If the income of the wife is higher than that of the 
husband, it is not required to provide such costs. 
102. To be accord ing to agreement: Notwithstanding anything 
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if there exists a written 
agreement between the husband and wife on the partition share or 
alimony to which the wife is entitled upon divorce, it shall be 
according to such agreement. 
  Provided that no agre ement which is against the interest of a 
minor may be made. 
103. Previous child or hu sband to obtain property: On the death of a 
divorcee woman, her son, daughter, if  any, shall be entitled to her 
property, and if not, the previous husband shall obtain the property 
received by her from such a hus band, and the successor on her 
mother's side shall obtain the other property.  
104. Statute of limitation:  A person aggrieved fr om any act done or 
action taken under this Chapter ma y make a lawsuit within three 
months after the date of accrual of the cause of action or knowledge 
of such an act or action.
59 
 
Chapter-4 
Provisions Relating to Relationship of Moth er, Father and Son and 
Daughter 
105. Maternity or paternity to be  determined from  mother or father:   
(1) If it is required to determine a person's maternity or paternity, it 
shall be determined on the basis of  his or her mother or father, as 
the case may be. 
(2) In determining paternity pursuant to sub-section (1), 
the person who was the husband of hi s or her mother at the time of 
birth of such a person shall be presumed, unless otherwise proved, 
to be a father of  such a person. 
106. Child presumed to be born from married husband: Unless 
otherwise proved, a child born in any of the following 
circumstances shall be  presumed to be born from the married 
husband: 
(a) Born after one hundred eigh ty days from the date on 
which the marriage was concluded, 
(b) Born within two hundred seventy-two days from the 
date on which the husband died  or divorce was effected. 
107. Paternity may be denied :  (1) Except as otherwise agreed upon 
between the husband and wife, the pa ternity of a child born to the 
wife before one hundred eighty da ys of the conclusion of marriage 
may be denied by the husband a nd by the successor to the husband 
where the husband had al ready died before the birth of such child. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
where a man concludes marriage wi th a woman with knowledge or
60 
 
having reasonable ground to know that she was pregnant before the 
marriage, the paternity of a child cannot be denied merely on the 
ground of his or her birth before that period. 
108. Son, daughter or pa ternity to be claimed: (1) If a child whose 
paternity or maternity is not determ ined has to be claimed as one's 
own son or daughter, su ch claim shall be made  within a period of 
two years of the child being born or being identified.  
(2) In claiming the paternity of a child born  without the 
paternity being identified, a claim shall be made within a period of 
two years of the birth of such child. 
Provided that no cl aim may be entertained if such child is 
already dead. 
109. Paternity of child born from artificial insemination to be of 
father: A child born from the use, wi th consent of the husband and 
wife, of artificial inseminati on system from semen of another 
person shall be considered to have been born from the married 
husband and his or her paternity shall be de termined accordingly. 
110. To be according to court's decision:  If there arises a dispute as to 
the maternity or paternity of a pe rson, its settlement shall be as 
decided by the Court. 
111. To obtain name and surname:  (1) Each person sh all, after birth, 
obtain the name as designated by  his or her mother or father 
according to his or her religion, culture, usage or tradition. 
(2) If the mother or father of  a person is not available for 
the time being or is not likely to be so ava ilable, the person shall
61 
 
obtain the name as designated by the guardian or curator taking care 
of (herchaha)  him or her. 
(3) Each person shall, after bi rth, be entitled to use after 
his or her name the surname design ated with the co nsent of his or 
her father and mother or failing su ch consent, the su rname of his or 
her father. 
Provided that a person whose pa ternity is not traced out shall 
be entitled to use after his or he r name the surname of his or her 
mother. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (3), 
a person may, if he or she so wish es, use the surname of his or her 
father or mother or of both. 
(5) If a dispute arises as to th e surname of a person, he or 
she shall be considered , unless otherwise proved, to have used the 
surname of his or her father. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, a person whose both fath er and mother ar e not traced out 
shall be entitled to use after his or her name the surname given by 
the guardian taking care of (herchaha)  him or her. 
112. Name of mother, father, gr and-father and grand-mother may 
be mentioned:  (1) If the name of mother, father and grand-father, 
grand- mother is requir ed by law to be mentioned in a formal act, 
legal act and proceeding or deed, any person shall be entitled to 
mention the name of his or her mother, father and grand-father, 
grand-mother.
62 
 
(2) If the father of a person who has to mention the name 
of his or her mother, father and gr and-father, grand- mother pursuant 
to sub-section (1) is not traced out, the person may mention the 
name of his or her mother and the mother's gran d-father, grand-
mother, and even where th e mother's name is not  traced out, it shall 
be sufficient to mention, setting out that matter, the name of the 
guardian or curator if he  or she is a minor, a nd only his or her name 
if he or she is a major. 
113. Birth of son, da ughter to be registered:  (1) If a son or daughter is 
born to a couple, the mother or fa ther shall file an application, 
within three months of the birth of  such a son or a daughter, before 
the authority specified according to law, for th e birth registration. 
(2) If one intends to file an application for the registration 
of a son or a daughter after the e xpiry of the time-limit referred to 
in sub-section (1), su ch fee as specified according to prevailing 
laws shall be charged. 
(3) If an application is filed pursuant to sub- section (1) or 
(2), the concerned authority shall,  after entering the details in the 
birth register maintain ed in the office, issu e a certificate of birth 
registration in the form as specif ied by the law to the applicant.  
(4) The details to be entere d in the register under sub-
section (3) shall incl ude the concerned pers on's name, surname, 
date of birth (year, m onth, instant and day as well) and place of 
birth, and the name, surname and address of his or her mother, 
father and grand- mother and grand-father, as well.
63 
 
(5) The concerned authority shall forward the details 
entered, pursuant to sub-section (3 ), in the register maintained in 
the office up to the last day of  every month to the District 
Administration Office, within a peri od of fifteen da ys of the first 
month thereafter and the said Office shall also enter such details up 
to the end of every month in the birth register maintained in the 
office for that purpose and forward the same in ever y three months 
to the Ministry specified by the Government of Nepal by a 
notification in the Nepal Gazette. 
(6) The concerned Mi nistry shall enter the details received 
pursuant to sub-section (5) in the birth register maintained for that 
purpose and maintain up-dated details each year. 
114. Obligation to care (herchaha) and maintain (shyahar samhar) : 
(1) The mother and fath er shall jointly care a nd maintain their every 
minor. 
(2) In caring and maintaining pursuant to sub- section (1), 
the father and mother shall provide for mainte nance, health care, 
education, sports and entert ainment and other necessary 
arrangements, according to  their financial cond ition and capability. 
115. To be under cust ody of mother or father:  (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in Section 114, if matrim onial relationship 
between a husband and wife is exti nguished in accord ance with law, 
a minor born from them shall rema in in the custody  of the mother 
or the father as prov ided herein below: 
(a) In the case of a minor who has not attained five 
years of age, under the cust ody of the mo ther, if she
64 
 
so desires irrespective of  whether or not she has 
concluded another marriage, 
(b) In the case of a minor above five years of age, 
except where the mother has concluded another 
marriage, under the custody of the mother, if she so 
desires, 
(c)  In the circumstance othe r than that referred to in 
clause (a) or (b), under the custody of the father. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
where the husband and wife have entered a separate agreement on 
the custody of a minor at the time of divorce or judicial separation, 
the agreement shall apply to the custody of the minor. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
while deciding as to which of the father an d the mother has the 
custody of a minor ab ove ten years of age,  the opinion of the 
concerned minor may also be obtained. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, if the mother  or father, under whos e custody a minor is 
living, dies, the surviving father or mother shall take the minor 
under his or her custod y without any delay. 
Provided that if the mother has already concluded another 
marriage, she is not obliged to take  a minor above five years of age 
under her custody. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, if the husband and wife , who get separated in accordance 
with law, have a minor, the main tenance, education and heath care
65 
 
of such a minor shall be according to the agreement concluded, if 
any, between the husb and and wife in that  respect, and in the 
absence of such an  agreement, it shal l be as follows: 
(a) In the case of a minor be low five years of age, the 
minor shall be under the mother's custody, 
(b) In the case of a minor who is of five years of age or 
above five but below ten years of age, the minor 
shall be under the father’s custody, 
(c) In case of a minor having attained ten ye ars of age, 
the minor shall be under the mother’s or the father’s 
custody, with whom the minor desires to live. 
116. Obligation to ta ke necessary care (herchaha) and provide 
maintenance (shyahar samhar) : (1) The father or  mother, as the 
case may be, who takes the custody of a minor pursuant to Section 
115, shall take care of and mainta in such minor, and, in so taking 
care of and maintaining the minor, the father or mo ther, as the case 
may be, shall do so in  accordance with the provi sions referred to in 
sub-section (2) of Section 114. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if the income of the father or mo ther who does not take the custody 
of a minor is higher th an that of the father or mother who takes the 
custody of the minor, such  a mother or a father  shall provide such a 
minor with such expenses, for the purpose of maintenance, 
education and treatment of the mi nor, as agreed upo n between such 
father and mother an d in the absence of such agreement, as 
specified by the court.
66 
 
117. Facility of visit to be provided:   (1) In cases where matrimonial 
relationship is extinguished or th e mother or fath er are living 
separately in accordance with law,  the minor shall be allowed to 
visit, from time to time, the father if he or she is living under the 
mother’s custody and th e mother if he or sh e is living under the 
father’s custody, or wi th the consent of the mother and father, to 
stay with either of them for some time. 
Provided that if it appears that  the interest of the minor is 
likely to be prejudiced in availing the facility of such visit or stay, 
the concerned court may issue an order prohibiting such visit or 
stay. 
(2) The frequency of visit to, or  the period of stay with, the 
father or the moth er, as the case may be, purs uant to sub-section (1), 
shall be as fixed by the concerned mother and father and, in the 
absence of such fixation , shall be as ordered by the concerned court. 
(3) If a minor is living with his father or mother pursuant 
to this Section, the father or moth er taking the custody of the minor 
shall take care of and maintain him or her in accordance with sub-
section (2) of Section 114. 
118. Rights of son, daughter remain to exist:  (1) Notwithstanding the 
matrimonial relationship between the husband and wife is 
extinguished pursuant to this Chapter, the lega l rights of the son, 
daughter born from them vis-à- vis the father, mother and the 
obligation of the father, mother vis-à-vis him or her shall remain in 
existence.
67 
 
(2) In spite of the father a nd mother of a person being 
incapable of becoming  husband and wife in  accordance with this 
Act, the legal rights of the son, daughter born from them vis-à-vis 
the father, mother and the obligatio n of the father, mother vis-à-vis 
him or her shall remain in existence. 
119. Prohibition on  living separately without consent:  (1) A son, 
daughter shall not, with out consent of his or her father or mother, 
live separately from his or  her father or mother.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
a son, daughter may live separately  from his or her father, mother in 
the following circumstance: 
(a) If he or she is separate d from his or her father, 
mother, with or without obtaining partition 
according to law, 
(b) If he or she concludes marriage, 
(c) If he or she attains at l east twenty one years of age, 
or 
(d) If he or she is  already employed. 
120. Minor not to work as labor:  A minor who is allowed to be 
engaged in a work as a labor acco rding to law cannot work as a 
labor without consent of the mother, father, other guardian or 
curator. 
121. Decision of father, mother taking custody of minor to prevail:  If 
there arises a dispute between th e father and mo ther, who cannot 
conclude marriage between them or  whose matrimonial relationship 
is extinguished pursuant  to this Act, on any matter to be decided in
68 
 
respect of the right a nd interest of a minor born from such father 
and mother, the decision made by th e father or moth er, as the case 
may be, with whom such a mi nor is living shall prevail. 
122. Son or daughter to ho nor, respect and care (herchaha) mother, 
father: (1) Every son or daughter sh all treat his or her mother, 
father with honor  and respect.  
(2) Every son or daughter sha ll, according to  his or her 
financial and social status, prov ide necessary care, maintenance, 
medical treatment or attention to his or her mother, father, 
notwithstanding living in an undi vided family or separately in 
accordance with law. 
123. Statute of  limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or 
action taken under this  Chapter may make a lawsuit within the 
specific statute of limitation, if an y, provided in this Chapter for 
making such lawsuit, and within si x months after the date on which 
such an act was done or action take n, in the other circumstances.
69 
 
Chapter-5 
Provisions Relating to Parental Authority 
124. To be under supervision an d control of father and mother:  (1) 
A minor son, daughter shall live under the supervision, oversight, 
control or author ity of their father and mother. 
(2) A minor living under sub- section (1) shall obey lawful 
order or direction given by his or her father, mother. 
125. Parental authority to be exercised jointly:  (1) The mother and 
father shall, jointly and with thei r mutual consent, exercise such 
authority over, fulfill such responsibility and duty towards, their 
son and daughter as required to be  exercised and fulfilled under this 
Chapter. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
the following mother or father, as  the case may be, shall, in the 
following circumstance, exercise such author ity and fulfill such 
responsibility and duty as to be exercised an d fulfilled pursuant to 
the said sub-section: 
(a) If either of the father an d mother dies, the surviving 
mother or father, 
(b) If either of th e mother and fath er is of unsound 
mind, the mother or fath er of sound mind, during 
the period of existence of such state of mind, 
(c) If the matrimonial relati onship between the mother 
and father is dissolved or  they have been living 
separate according to law, the mother or  father who 
has taken the custody of the minor,
70 
 
(d)  If the father of a minor is not traced ou t, the mother. 
126. Rights, responsibilities and duties of person exercising maternal 
and parental authority:  The rights, responsibi lities and duties of 
the father or mother who is en titled to exercise the parental 
authority pursuant to this Ch apter shall be as follows: 
(a) To keep the minor wi th him or her, provide 
company to the minor and watch the minor's works, 
actions and behaviors, 
(b) To provide food and clothes and to teach him or her 
to eat, wear and labor, 
(c) To provide affecti on, fondness and love,  
(d) To inculcate in him or her social di gnity, decency, 
morals, rites, culture, cust oms and to educate him or 
her to behave accordingly;  
(e) To provide moral educatio n based on social values 
such as honesty, self-c onfidence, self-reliance, 
integrity, labor and discipline, 
(f) To vigil physi cal and mental heal th, to provide and 
cause to be provided medical treatment, 
(g) To provide opportunity, according to necessity, for 
sports and entertainment, 
(h) To make available read-worthy and message-
oriented educational materials, 
(i) To guide to remain loyal to the family, society, 
community, nation and state,
71 
 
(j) To prevent from bad habits, bad association and 
obscene matter, 
(k) To teach to obey order, honor and revere, 
(l) To do, or cause to be done, such other act 
whatsoever as may be requ ired for the development 
of physical, mental and intellectual personality. 
127. Prohibition on discrimination:  The mother or father shall not 
make discrimination between their children, in any manner, in the 
maintenance, education and upbrin ging, sports, me dical treatment, 
entertainment, facility or household work of their children on the 
ground of son or daug hter or between sons or between daughters. 
128. Special care (herchaha)  to be taken:  (1) If any son or daughter 
is physically or mentally handica pped or disabled or has contracted 
a deadly disease such as human immune-deficiency virus (HIV) or 
Hepatitis B, the mother, father shall take special care of, and 
provide special treatment and pr otection to, such  a son or a 
daughter. 
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter, the term 
"physically or mentally handi capped" means a physically or 
mentally impaired person who hi mself or herself is unable or 
incompetent to carry out daily work. 
(2) In order to make the son or  daughter as referred to in 
sub-section (1) financia lly self-reliant in the future by having 
arrangements for prov iding special medical treatment, the mother 
and father shall make, according to  their financia l condition and
72 
 
capacity, arrangements for impartin g special education or training 
to such son or daughter. 
129. Power to cause mi nor to improve  conduct and habit:  If the 
mother or father consider it nece ssary to make the minor, who is 
under their supervision, oversight, control or author ity pursuant to 
this Chapter, improve his or he r behavior, habi t, conduct and 
character, they may do su ch acts as they thin k appropriate vis-à-vis 
such a minor and make him or he r improve his or her behavior, 
habit or conduct. 
   Provided that the minor shall not be subjected to any 
treatment that entails p hysical or mental pain. 
130. Authority deemed to be provided to exercise right:  If the mother 
and father appoint a t eacher for the educatio n and upbringing of 
their son or daughter or admits the child into an educational 
institute for any kind of  education, the teacher  so appointed or the 
headmaster or teacher of  such an institute shal l be deemed to have 
been given the authority  to exercise the righ ts as referred to in 
Section 129 in respect of education and upbringing. 
131. Guardian or curator may also  exercise parental authority:  If a 
minor is living with the guardian or  curator for the reason that both 
of his or her mother and father ha ve died or disappeared or his or 
her mother has concluded another marriage following the death of 
his or her father or both of hi s or her mother and father have 
become of unsound mind, his or her guardian or cura tor, as the case 
may be, may exercise such paternal authority and fulfill such 
responsibilities and dutie s as required to be exercised and fulfilled 
by the mother and father  under this Chapter.
73 
 
132. Power to restrict parental authority:  (1) If a compla int is filed by 
a person or a child welfare organi zation incorporated pursuant to 
law specifying that a person who is entitled to exerci se the paternal 
authority pursuant to  this Chapter has committed any of the 
following acts against a minor and, if  the allegation is proved from 
an inquiry into the matter, the c ourt may prevent such a person from 
exercising such authority: 
(a) Subjecting a minor to cruel, inhumane or torturous 
punishment or treatment,  
(b) Neglecting, disregarding or abusing the minor from 
time to time, 
(c) Engaging a minor in an immoral or sexual 
profession,  
(d) Employing a minor in a wo rk likely to endanger the 
body, life or health, 
(e) Causing loss and damage to a minor’s property by 
spending it against his or he r interest or selling such 
property to others with the intention of taking it 
subsequently, 
(f) Compelling a minor to  abandon family life by 
making him or her a  Sanyasi,  fakir, monk, nun, 
Paschar or in similar other way, 
(g) Engaging a minor in begging, except while 
observing a religious or cultural rite,
74 
 
(h) Causing a minor to do an y other act constituting an 
offense under law. 
(2) If a restriction is imposed pursuant to sub-section (1), 
the court shall appoint a guardian according to law, authorizing him 
or her to exercise the parental auth ority in respect of such a minor.  
(3) If the guardian is  appointed to exer cise the parental 
authority pursuant to sub-section (2 ), such a guardian may exercise 
the parental authority under this  Chapter in consonance with the 
interests of the minor. 
(4) If the person, who is prev ented from exercising the 
parental authority pursuant to sub- section (1), makes a petition in 
the Court, making an u ndertaking not to repeat the act referred to in 
the said sub-section, the court may lift the restriction imposed on 
him or her and revoke the appointme nt as referred to  in sub-section 
(2). 
133. Termination of parental authority:  (1) The parental authority 
which the mother and fa ther are entitl ed to exercise over their son 
or daughter child pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed to have 
been terminated in  any of the following circumstances: 
(a) If the son or daughter atta ins eighteen years of age, 
 (b) If the son or daughter li ves separately after getting 
an employment. 
Provided that where any son or daughter is 
physically or mentally handicapped, the parental 
authority over him or her shall, except in cases
75 
 
where he or she lives se parately by concluding 
marriage, not be terminated. 
134. Statute of limitation:  A person aggrieved fr om any act done or 
action taken under this  Chapter may make a lawsuit within six 
months after the date on which su ch an act was done or action was 
taken.
76 
 
Chapter-6 
Provisions Relating to Guardianship 
135. To be cons idered guardian:  A person who is appointed or liable 
under this Chapter to protect the person, protection of rights and 
interest of an incomp etent or quasi-competent person shall be 
considered to be a guardian. 
136. Priority order of guardian:   (1) Subject to the other Sections of 
this Chapter, a person in the following priority order shall,  ipso 
facto, be a guardian of an incompet ent or quasi-competent person: 
(a) Husband or wife li ving in a joint family, 
(b) Father or mother, 
(c) Son, daughter or widow da ughter-in-law living in a 
joint family, 
(d) Separated husband or wife, 
(e) Separated son, daughter or widow daughter-in-law, 
(f) Grand-father or grand-mother, 
(g) Grand-son or grand-daughter, 
(h) Elder or younger brother or elder or younger sister, 
(i) Grand-father, gr and-mother on the mother's parent 
side, maternal uncle,  maternal aunty. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
the following person shall be a guardian in the following 
circumstances:
77 
 
(a) Where there are more than one person in one 
priority order eligible to be a guardian, the person 
mutually agreed upon by th em, and in the absence 
of such agreement, the pers on as designated by the 
court,  
(b) In the case of a person of sound mind and having 
attained ten years of age, a person chosen by him or 
her, 
  Provided that in so ch oosing the guardian, a deed 
shall be executed to that effect and certified by the 
court. 
(c) In the case of a minor of a couple whose 
matrimonial relationship has been extinguished in 
accordance with law, the father or mother who 
maintains him or her, 
(d) If any person who is in the first priority order 
declines to be a guardian, becomes of unsound mind 
or does not act in the cap acity of a guardian, the 
person who is in the next priority order.  
Provided that if a person in the next order is 
to so become a guardian, the person shall get it 
certified by the court that he or she is the guardian. 
137. Other person cons idered to be guardian:  Notwithstanding 
anything contained in Section 136, if guardianship to an 
incompetent or qu asi-competent pe rson is provid ed by a person 
other than the one referred to in  that Section, the person so
78 
 
providing guardianship sh all be considered to be a guardian of such 
a person. 
Provided that the person who so becomes a guardian shall get 
it certified by the court that he or she is the guardian. 
138. Organization considered to be guardian:  (1) If a child, who is 
living in an organization, such as  a child welfare house, orphanage, 
child home or children's organizatio n, registered pursuant to law  
with the object to have  welfare of and protect rights and interests of 
children, has no other guardian, such an organization shall be 
considered to be his or her guardian. 
(2) In doing any act or taking  any action on behalf of a 
minor living in an organization refe rred to in sub-section (1), the 
chief of such an organi zation shall do such an act or take such an 
action. 
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter and Chapter-7 
of Part-3, the term "chi ef" means the chief exec utive officer of that 
organization or the chairperson,  general manager, managing 
director or other officer  acting in that capacity. 
139. Guardian may be appointed by court: (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in Section 136 or 137, the court may, in the 
following circumstances, appoint a pa rticular person as the guardian, 
specifying the reason therefor: 
(a) If the concerned ward committee of the concerned 
Local Level files a petition in the court for the 
appointment of guardian in cases where any person 
declines to be a guardian pursuant to Section 136,
79 
 
(b) If the stakeholder files a petition in the court for the 
appointment of guardian. 
(2) In appointing a guardian pursu ant to sub-section (1), the 
court shall consider whether or not the rights, interests or protection 
of such incompetent or quasi-competent person may be secured. 
(3) In appointing a guardian pursu ant to sub-section (1), the 
court shall also obtain the consent of the person to be appointed as 
the guardian. 
(4) After appointing a guardian pu rsuant to sub-section (1), 
the court shall give a written notice thereof to the person to be 
guardian and the Local Level. 
140. Supervisor may be designated: (1) If a guardian is appointed by the 
court pursuant to Section 139, th e court may, if it considers 
necessary to inquire into the acts and actions of such a guardian, 
designate any person as the supervisor. 
(2) The supervisor designated pursuant to sub-section (1) 
shall make necessary inquiry into the acts and actions of the guardian 
and submit a report thereof to the court. 
(3) If the guardianship is terminated pursuant to Section 
148, the state of supervision shall also be, ipso facto deemed to be,  
terminated. 
141. Disqualifications for guardian:  None of the following persons may 
become a guardian: 
(a) An incompetent or quasi-competent person,
80 
 
(b) A person proved to have  done an act against the 
rights and interests of an incompetent or quasi-
competent person, 
(c) A person sentenced by a court to imprisonment for a 
term of three years or more. 
  Provided that this clause shall not be deemed to 
prevent a person who is in the priority order under 
sub-section (1) of Section 136 from being a guardian. 
(d) A person deemed disqualif ied to be a guardian by a 
count.  
142. Maintenance (palan poshan)  and care of (herbichar) 
incompetent or quasi-competent person:  (1) The guardian shall 
make arrangements for the main tenance, health, education, 
entertainment and care of an inco mpetent or quasi-competent person 
under his or her guardianship from the property belonging to such a 
person, if any, and if  such property is not available, from the 
property belonging to the guardian himself or herself. 
(2) The arrangements for th e maintenance, health, 
education, entertainment and care  of an incompetent or quasi-
competent person, pursuant to sub- section (1), shall be made from 
the movable property belonging to su ch a person, if any, and where 
there is no such movable property or where arrangements for the 
maintenance, health, education, entertainment and care cannot be 
made from that property, his or he r immovable property may be sold 
for that purpose with the prior permission of the court.
81 
 
Provided that it is not required to obtain permission of the 
court to sell the immovable property  where a person in the priority 
order under sub-section (1) of Section 136 is the guardian. 
143. Property to be supervised, protected and managed properly:  (1) 
The guardian shall supervise and protect the property belonging to 
the incompetent or quasi-compe tent person under his or her 
guardianship.  
(2) The guardian may carry on any business or transaction 
by investing the property belonging to the person under his or her 
guardianship. 
144. To maintain books and accounts accurately:  (1) The guardian 
shall maintain accurately the books and accounts of expenditures 
incurred in the maintenance (palan poshan) , health, education and 
care of (herbichar) the incompetent or qua si-competent person 
under his or her guardianship, and of the incomes and expenditures 
made in the course of the manage ment of the property belonging to 
that person and the inventory proving the ownership of such property. 
Provided that it is not require d to maintain such books and 
accounts where a person in the priority order referred to in sub-
section (1) of Section 136 is a guardian. 
(2) The guardian shall submit the books and accounts 
maintained pursuant to sub-secti on (1) and the inventory proving the 
ownership of that property to the incompetent or quasi-competent 
person within one year after the date on which that person has 
attained majority pursuant to la w or the date on which that person 
has notified in writing the court that he or she is competent to carry 
out business.
82 
 
(3) If an incompetent or quasi-competent person dies when 
he or she was under guardianship,  the guardian shall submit the 
books and accounts and the invent ory proving ownership of that 
property referred to in sub-secti on (1) to that person’s nearest 
successor within six months after the date of his or her death.   
145. Power to institute legal  action or defend case:  The guardian may, 
for the protection of the rights, inte rests of an incompetent or quasi-
competent person under his or her guardianship, institute a legal 
action against such a person or defend a case filed against him or her. 
Provided that the guardian is not allowed to so renounce a 
claim or plea in relation to a cas e instituted upon the incompetent or 
quasi-competent person being its plai ntiff or defendant or execute a 
deed of compromise in any case as to cause an adverse effect to him 
or her. 
146. Power to act  on behalf of incompet ent or quasi-competent 
person: Subject to the provisions c ontained elsewhere in this 
Chapter, the guardian may carry out  such act on behalf of the 
incompetent or quasi-competent person as may be carried out by that 
person according to law. 
147. Act may be carried out only in consonance with terms:  
Notwithstanding anything contained el sewhere in this Chapter, if a 
person is designated as the guardi an for an incompetent or quasi-
competent person with specification of certain terms, such a guardian 
shall have the authority to carry out acts only in consonance with 
such terms.
83 
 
148. Termination of guardianship:  (1) A guardianship shall be deemed 
to be terminated in any of the following circumstances: 
(a) If a petition filed by the gua rdian stating that he or 
she is unable to be a guardian is accepted by the 
court, 
(b) If the guardian or the incompetent or quasi-
competent person under guardianship dies, 
(c) If the incompetent or quasi-competent person 
becomes a competent, 
(d) If, at the request of the incompetent or quasi-
competent person under guardianship, the court 
removes the guardian. 
(2) If a guardianship is termin ated pursuant to sub-section 
(1) and the person who was the guardian and the person who was 
under guardianship are surviving, the person who had worked as 
guardian shall continue to maintain (palan poshan)  and take care 
of(herbichar)  the incompetent or quasi-c ompetent person under his 
or her guardianship until another guardian is appointed.  
(3) If a guardianship is termin ated pursuant to sub-section 
(1), the statute of limitation, tim e-limit or appointed date for 
appearance in relation to any legal proceedings required to be carried 
out by the guardian pursuant to this Chapter shall not be deemed to 
have been expired, fro m the date on which the guardianship is so 
terminated until another guardian is appointed. 
149. Guardianship not to be transferred to successor:  If a guardianship 
is terminated upon the death of th e guardian pursuant to Section 148,
84 
 
the right, authority and responsibility vested in him or her in the 
capacity of a guardian shall not be transferred to his or her successor. 
   Provided that in cases where another guardian is required to be 
appointed for an incompetent or qua si-competent pers on, he or she 
shall, in the capacity of th e successor to the guardian, 
maintain(palanposhan)  and take care of (herbichar) such 
incompetent or quasi-competent person until another guardian is 
appointed. 
150. Power to recover expenses:  If any guardian ha s arranged the 
maintenance, health, education, sports, entertainment and care 
of(herbichar)  the incompetent or quasi-c ompetent person under his 
or her guardianship from his or her own property, the guardian may 
recover the amount of expenses so incurred from the property 
belonging to the incompetent or quasi-competent person under his or 
her guardianship. 
Provided that such expense ca nnot be so recovered where a 
person in the priority order referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 
136 is the guardian. 
151. Amount of loss and dam age may be recovered: If the guardian 
knowingly, deceitfully, fraudulently or dishonestly causes loss and 
damage to the property belonging  to the incompetent or quasi-
competent person under his or her gua rdianship in such manner as to 
or not to benefit himself or herself, the incompetent or quasi-
competent person aggrieved there from may recover the amount of 
loss and damage caused to him or her from such a guardian.
85 
 
152. Statute of  limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or 
action taken under this Chapter ma y make a lawsuit within six 
months after the date of knowledge of such act or action.
86 
 
Chapter-7 
Provisions Relating to Curatorship 
153. To be curator of minor: (1) If any minor does not have any 
guardian as referred to in Chapter-6 of this Part, any person may act 
in the capacity of cura tor of such a minor for the maintenance, 
health, education, care of, and prot ection of property belonging to, 
him or her, until the minor a ttains eighteen years of age.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
a person may appoint a ny one as a curator fo r the maintenance, 
health, education and care of his or her minor. 
154. Curator of person  of unsound mind:  (1) If a person of unsound 
mind does not have any guardian as re ferred to in Chapter-6 of this 
Part, any other person may act in  the capacity of curator for the 
maintenance, care of, and protectio n of property belonging to, him 
or her. 
(2) If there is no curator or the curator cannot be 
ascertained under sub-section (1), the person under whose custody, 
supervision or oversight the pers on of unsound mind is living for 
the time being shall be the curator of such a person. 
155. Mother to become curator of minor:  Notwithstanding anything 
contained in Section 153, if the fa ther of any minor below ten years 
of age has died or disappeared or become of unsound mind or is in 
abroad and the moth er of such a minor is a live, she herself shall be 
the curator of that minor even though she has concluded another 
marriage.
87 
 
156. Body corporate to  become curator:  (1) If any pers on who has no 
guardian under Chapter-6 of this Part is under the supervision, 
protection or custody of a body co rporate, such a body corporate 
shall be the curator of such a person. 
(2) If a body corporate refe rred to in sub-section (1) 
becomes a curator, the ch ief of such a body co rporate shall exercise 
the authority of a curator. 
157. Court may appoint curator:  (1) If any person has no guardian 
under Chapter-6 of this Part or no one acts as his or her curator, the 
concerned ward committee of the Lo cal Level may file a petition, 
stating the details thereof, in th e court for the ap pointment of a 
curator. 
(2) In filing a peti tion pursuant to su b-section (1), the 
concerned ward committee of the Local Level shall set out the 
names, surnames, addresses and prof essions of the potential persons 
who could be appointed as the cura tor and also submit, along with 
the petition, a deed of consent given by such potential persons to act 
as the curator. 
(3) If a petition is filed pursua nt to sub-section (1), the 
court shall make an order to ap point any one appr opriate person, 
out of the persons whose names are submitted pursuant to sub-
section (2), as the curator. 
158. Qualifications of curator:  Any person other th an a person who is 
disqualified for being a guardia n pursuant to Section 141 may 
become a curator.
88 
 
159. Curator to take cu stody of property:  (1) The curator shall take 
custody of, manage and operate, the property be longing to the 
person under his or  her curatorship. 
(2) The curator shall arra nge for the maintenance, 
education and medical treatment of  the person under his or her 
curatorship, to the extent possible  in view of his or her capacity, 
from the property taken into  custody by him or her. 
160. Power to use property:  A person who becomes a curator may 
spend all the returns obtained fr om the property under his or her 
custody for the maintenance, health  of the person under his or her 
curatorship and for the education of such a person, if he or she is a 
minor. 
161. Power to spend immovable pr operty with court's permission: 
(1) If the movable property belongi ng to the person under his or her 
curatorship is insuffic ient to meet the expe nses required for the 
maintenance, education or medical  treatment of th at person, the 
curator may file a petition, setting  out the matter, in the court for 
permission to sell the immovable property or any part thereof for 
that purpose. 
(2) If, upon inquiring  into a petition filed pursuant to sub-
section (1), it considers the reas on for selling such immovable 
property to be reasonab le, the court may grant permission to so sell 
the immovable property or any part thereof as it considers 
appropriate. 
162. Property to be taken care of and protected ra tionally and 
carefully:  (1) A curator shall look af ter of and protect the property
89 
 
belonging to a person under his or  her curatorship rationally and 
carefully. 
(2) The concerned curator shal l be liable for any kind of 
loss or damage to the property be longing to the person under his or 
her curatorship because of his or her failure to so  look after and 
protect the property pursua nt to sub-section (1). 
Provided that the curator shall not be liable for any loss or 
damage to such property due to a disaster. 
(3) If a complaint is filed with allegation that the curator 
has failed to look after of and pr otect the property pursuant to sub-
section (1), the court may rem ove the concerned person from 
curatorship. 
163. Transfer of title, ipso facto  to be void: If a curator sells any 
immovable property belonging to  the person under his or her 
curatorship to himself or herself or to any of his or her family 
members, with ulterior motive to disentitling such a person to that 
property or the title thereto happens  to be transferred to him or her 
in any manner, such tran sfer of title shall, ipso facto, be void. 
164. Curatorship to be terminated ipso facto : (1) Curatorship shall be 
deemed to have been terminated ipso facto  in any of the following 
circumstances: 
(a) In the case of a minor, if  he or she attains eighteen 
years of age, 
(b) In the case of a person of unsound mind, if he or 
she becomes of sound mind,
90 
 
(c) If custody of the minor is  taken by the mother or 
father or both,  
(d) If the guardian  of a minor or person of unsound 
mind is appointed, 
(e) If the court removes a person from curatorship 
pursuant to sub-secti on (3) of Section 162, 
(f) If the curator has no qua lification referred to in 
Section 158, 
(g) If the curator or the pers on under curatorship dies. 
(2) If curatorship is terminated pursuant to sub-section (1), 
the curator shall immediately retu rn to the concerned person the 
property taken into custody in the capacity of curator. 
165. Custody of property may be handed over:  (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained elsewh ere in this Chapter, if a person is unable 
to protect and manage th e property under his or  her title, ownership 
or possession on his or her own, for the reason that he  or she has to 
go elsewhere by leaving the place wher e he or she resides, he or she 
may appoint any person as a curato r to that end an d hand over the 
custody of such property to that other person. 
(2) If the custody of property  is handed over to any person 
pursuant to sub-section (1), the person taking the custody of such 
property shall protect and mana ge the property and return the 
property to the person handing ov er its custody as  and when the 
handing over pers on so requires.
91 
 
166. Requirement to cert ification by court:  One who becomes a 
curator pursuant to Sections 153, 154 and 165 shall get that matter 
certified by the court. 
167. Application of other provisions:  The provisions  contained in 
Sections 144, 145, 146, 147, 14 9, 150 and 151 shall also apply 
mutatis mutandis  to the curator and the person under curatorship. 
168. Statute of  limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or 
action taken under this  Chapter may make a lawsuit within six 
months after the date of knowle dge of such an act or action.
92 
 
Chapter-8 
Provisions Relating to Adoption  
169. To be deemed adopte d son or adopted daughter: If a person 
accepts a son or daughter of anothe r person as his or her son or 
daughter, such a son or a daughter shall be deem ed to be an adopted 
son or daughter.  
170. Adoption to be effected in a ma nner to protect th e best interests 
of child: In effecting adoption pursuant to this Act, adoption shall 
be effected in a manner to protect th e best rights and interests of the 
child. 
171. Prohibition on adoption by person having child:  (1) No person 
having his or her own son shall adopt a son and no person having 
his or her own daughter shall a dopt a daughter pursuant to this 
Chapter. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if a son or daughter does not li ve with a man or woman who is 
living separately by the reason of judicial separation, such a man or 
a woman may adopt a son or a daughter. 
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter and Chapter-9 
of this Part, the term "judicial separation" means a circumstance 
where a person obtains partition in property according to the order 
of the court or lives separately acco rding to law or lives separately 
after separation of bread and bo ard from other coparceners. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) 
or (2), if a person w ho has a biological son or daughter makes a 
petition in the concerned court fo r the adoption of  another child,
93 
 
disclosing therein his or her financial capacity to make 
arrangements for the maintenance, health care, education and care 
of the child, and if, upon  inquiring into such a petition, it appears 
that the petitioner has such status, the court may grant permission to 
him or her to adopt such child.  
172. Adoption may be effected:  (1) The following person may effect 
adoption of a child: 
(a) A couple to whom no child has born even up to ten 
years of the marriage, 
(b) An unmarried woman having completed forty-five 
years of age, a widow,  divorcee woman or 
judicially separated woma n, having no son or 
daughter, 
 (c) An unmarried man havi ng completed forty-five 
years of age, a widower, divorcee or judicially 
separated man, having no son or daughter. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
the following person can not effect adoption: 
(a) One who is of unsound mind, 
(b) One who is convicted by  the court of a criminal 
offense involving moral turpitude, 
(c) One who does not have financial capacity to afford 
maintenance, health care, e ducation, sports facility, 
entertainment and ca re of the minor.
94 
 
(3) In effecting adoption by the husband or wife living in a 
joint family pursua nt to this Section, they  shall obtain each other's 
consent. 
173. Adoption not to be effected:  (1) No one shall e ffect adoption of 
any of the following persons: 
  (a) One who has completed fourteen years of age, 
(b) One who is the only son or daughter, 
 Provided that this provis ion shall not apply to the 
circumstance referred to in sub-section (3) of Section 
175. 
(c) One who has been once adopted  as a son or daughter, 
 Provided that this pr ovision shall not apply 
where the adoption  is annulled according to law. 
(d) One who is in higher degree of relationship than the 
person adopting the son or daughter, 
(e) One who is not a citizen of Nepal. 
 Provided that the provis ion of this clause shall 
not apply to a non-resident  Nepali citizen who has 
obtained a foreign citizenship. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) of 
sub-section (1), if the person to be  adopted is a person within the 
relation of three generations or a son or daughter born to the ex-
husband of the wife, that person ma y be adopted even though he or 
she has completed four teen years of age.
95 
 
174. Difference of age betwee n adopter and adoptee:  (1) The age 
difference between the adopter an d the adoptee shal l be at least 
twenty-five years. 
  (2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
no age restriction shall apply to the adoption of a person within the 
relation of three generations. 
175. Consent to be obta ined for adoption:   (1) In effecting adoption of 
a child, the adopter shall obtain wr itten consent of both father and 
mother of such a child, if both of  them are surviving, and of the 
surviving father or moth er, as the case may be, if  either of them is 
surviving. 
  (2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if the father and mother are separa ted because of the dissolution of 
matrimonial relationship between the husband and wife or judicial 
separation, and a child living with such a father or mother 
according to the agreement made at the time of such dissolution or 
judicial separation is intended to be adopted, the adopter shall 
obtain consent of the person with whom, out of the father and the 
mother, the child has been living. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
adoption of a child whose father and mother are not traced or 
surviving or a child wh ose father and mother are surv iving but who 
has been maintained or cared by a person or organization following 
the conclusion of another marriage either by his or her father or 
mother may be effected  by obtaining written co nsent of the person 
or organization so maintaining or caring the child.
96 
 
(4) While adopting a child ab ove ten years of  age pursuant 
to sub-section (1), (2) or (3), written consent of such a child shall 
also be obtained. 
(5) Written consent referred to in sub-section (4) shall be 
executed by the concerne d child in the presence of his or her father, 
mother or guardian or curator exercising the maternal and parental 
authority. 
(6) Before obtaining consent pu rsuant to this Section, 
information shall be gi ven to the person putting a child up for 
adoption, guardian or cura tor and the child about, inter alia , the 
meaning, legal status and consequences of adoption. 
(7) No financial inducement of any type shall be made in 
obtaining consent pursuant to this Section and such consent requires 
to be given voluntarily. 
176. Adoption deemed to have been  effected by couple themselves:  If 
adoption was effected by the husband or wife living under judicial 
separation and, subsequent thereto,  the husband and wife have lived 
jointly, the adoption effected before living so jointly shall be 
deemed to have been e ffected by the couple. 
177. Procedures for ef fecting adoption:  (1) If a person is desirous of 
adopting a child, he or she shall make a petiti on to the concerned 
court, along with a duly  executed deed of adoption, in fulfillment of 
the legal requirements. 
(2) If, upon inquiring  into the deed of adoption received 
pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned district court finds that 
permission may be given to the peti tioner for adopti on, it shall issue
97 
 
an order granting permission fo r adoption and shall authenticate 
such deed. 
(3) If, upon making inquiry pursu ant to sub-section (2), the 
court finds that permission cannot be given to the petitioner for 
adoption, it shall issu e an order accordingly and give information 
thereof to the petitioner. 
178. Entitlements and rights of  adopted son or daughter:  (1) The 
entitlements, rights, obligations an d responsibilities of an adopted 
son or daughter shall be  the same as that of  a biological son or 
daughter of the adoptive person. 
(2) Even if a son or daughter is born to a person who has 
already adopted a person,  the equal status of such adopted son or 
adopted daughter to that of biolog ical son or daught er shall not be 
prejudiced thereby. 
179. Surname of adopte d son or daughter:  An adopted son or 
daughter may use the surname of either or both of  the adoptive 
father and mother. 
  Provided that- 
(1) If an adopted son or daug hter so desires, he or she 
may use also the surname of his or her biological 
father or mother. 
(2) If the adoption is annulle d, his or her surname shall 
be that of his or her biological father or mother. 
180. Not allowed to  claim partition share of father and mother:  An 
adopted son or daughter shall not be entitled to claim partition share 
in the property belonging to his or  her biological fa ther and mother.
98 
 
  Provided that- 
(1) If the adoption is annu lled, he or she may claim 
partition share in the property belonging to his or her 
biological father and mother, 
(2) If an adopted son or daugh ter has already obtained his 
or her partition share at the time of effecting adoption, 
he or she may receive such property as well. 
181. Adoptive person's obligations: (1) The obligation s of an adoptive 
person shall be as follows:  
(a) To make arrangements fo r the maintenance, health 
care, sports, entertainment and proper education of 
the adopted son or daughter  according to his or her 
reputation and capacity as if  he or she were his or 
her biological son or daughter, 
(b) To protect the rights a nd interests of the adopted 
son or daughter, 
(c) To exercise the authority as referred to in Chapter-5 
of this Part. 
(2) If the adoptive person does not fulfill the obligations 
under sub-section (1), the adopt ed son or daughter may live 
separately by obtaining his or her partition share. 
182. Obligations of ad opted son or daughter:  The obligations of the 
adopted son or daughter shall be as follows: 
(a) To make arrangements fo r the maintenance, health 
care and care of the adopti ve person according to
99 
 
his or her reputation and capacity as if  such person 
were his or her natural father or mother, 
(b) To protect, look afte r and properly manage the 
property of the adoptive person, 
(c) To protect the rights an d interests of the adoptive 
person. 
183. Facility of visit and making correspondences to be provided:  
The adoptive person sh all provide facility to  the adopted son or 
daughter to make visits to, a nd correspondence with, his or her 
biological father and mo ther, from time to time. 
184. Adoption to be void:  If a person effects a doption in co ntravention 
of Section 171, sub-s ection (1) of, and clause s (a) and (b) of sub-
section (2) of Section 172, Sect ions 173, 174 and 175, such 
adoption shall ipso facto be void. 
185. Voidable adoption:  (1) If an adoptive pers on fails to fulfill the 
obligations referred to in Sectio n 181, any adopted son or daughter 
may have the adoption annulled. 
Provided that if su ch adopted son or da ughter has already 
received a partition share, he or she shall not be entitl ed to have the 
adoption annulled. 
(2) An adoptive person may have the adoption annulled in 
any of the following circumstances: 
(a) If the adopted son or da ughter fails to fulfill the 
obligations referred to in Section 182,
100 
 
(b) If the adopted son or da ughter expels him or her 
from home or subjects hi m or her to physical or 
mental torture, from time to time, 
(c) If the adopted son or daughter misuses his or her 
property, 
(d) If the adopted son or daug hter leaves him or her and 
lives separately without hi s or her consent for three 
years or more. 
(3) The provisions of clauses (a) and (d) of sub-section (2) 
shall not apply to the ma rried adopted daughter. 
186. Termination of adoption:  (1) If adoption is annulled pursuant to 
Section 184 or 185, the relationship between the adoptive person 
and the adopted son or daughter shall be deemed to have been 
terminated.  
(2) If the relationship between  the adoptive person and the 
adopted son or daughter is terminat ed pursuant to sub-section (1), 
the entitlements, rights and obligatio ns vested in him or her in the 
capacity of adopted son or daught er shall also be terminated. 
Provided that no facilities alre ady enjoyed, rights acquired or 
exercised and obligations fulfilled in the capacity of  adopted son or 
daughter during the vali dity period of adoption  shall be prejudiced. 
187. Statute of limitation:  A person aggrieved fr om any act done or 
action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within one year 
after the date on which su ch an act was done or  an action was taken.
101 
 
Chapter-9 
Provisions Relating to Inter-Country Adoption 
188. Inter-countr y adoption deemed  to be accepted:  If any foreigner 
accepts a minor of a Nepali citizen or of a foreig ner domiciled in 
Nepal as an adopted son or daug hter, it shall be deemed to be 
accepted as an inter-country adoption. 
189. Adoption not to be effect ed without obtaining permission:  (1) 
No foreigner shall be allowed to ho ld any minor of a Nepali citizen 
or of a foreigner domic iled in Nepal as an adopted son or daughter, 
without obtaining permission from the Government of Nepal. 
(2) Permission for adoption under this Chapter shall be 
granted only to the citizens or ma rried couple of those countries 
which are opened by the Government of Nepal, by a notification in 
the Nepal Gazette, for inter- country adoption in Nepal. 
190. Best interests of minor to be ensu red in granting permission for 
adoption: (1) Prior to granting perm ission to a foreigner for 
adoption, the Government of Nepa l shall consider whether or not 
the best interests of the child wi ll be ensured, his or her human 
rights will be protected and such  a child will be abducted, sold, 
trafficked or otherwise abused. 
(2) Permission for adoption under this Chapter shall be 
granted only if, upon consideri ng the matters pursuant to sub-
section (1), it appears appropriate to grant permission to a foreigner 
to adopt a child.
102 
 
191. Child eligible to be  given for adoption:  Any of the following 
children having stayed in a childr en home for at least six months 
may be given to a foreigner for adoption: 
(a) Orphan children who, upo n death of both father and 
mother, are not under pr otection of any one, 
(b) Voluntarily abandoned children. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,- 
(1) "Children home" means a child welfare home and 
orphanage established in acco rdance with law, with the 
objective of protecting the rights and interests of 
children, and this term in cludes a children home or 
Balmandir established by the Government of Nepal. 
(2) "Orphan child" means an y of the following child 
certified as an orphan by the District Administration 
Office: 
(a) A child found unclaimed by the police, 
and whose father or mother is not found, 
(b) A child left unclaimed in a hospital or 
health institution, 
(c) A child whose father  and mother are not 
traced out, 
(d) A child whose father  and mother are both 
dead and who has no property for 
maintenance.
103 
 
(3) "Voluntarily abandoned ch ildren" means the following 
children who have been surr endered to the custody of a 
children home, through th e District Administration 
Office, by the following pers on, upon being unable to 
make arrangements for their maintenance and 
education, by executing a deed relating thereto:  
(a) In the case of a child whose father is dead or 
disappeared and mother has concluded 
another marriage, such a mother, 
(b) If more than one ch ild have born, and the 
mother is not financiall y able to afford their 
maintenance or education because the father 
is dead, disappeared or  of unsound mind, in 
the case of such chil dren, their mother, 
(c) If more than one ch ild have born, and the 
father is not financiall y able to afford their 
maintenance or educatio n because the mother 
is dead, disappeared or  of unsound mind, in 
the case of such chil dren, their father, 
(d) In the case of an or phan child who has no 
property, his or her guardian or curator. 
192. Foreigner eligible  for adopting son or daughter:  (1) Permission 
may be granted to the following foreigner for the adoption of any 
child of a Nepali citizen or of a foreigner domiciled in Nepal: 
(a) A couple from whom no child is born even up to ten 
years of their marriage,
104 
 
(b) An unmarried woman a widow, divorcee woman or a 
judicially separated woma n who has completed forty-
five but not fifty-five years of age, having no son or 
daughter, 
(c) An unmarried man a widower,  divorcee or a judicially 
separated man who has comp leted forty-five but not 
fifty-five years of age, having no son or daughter. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
no permission may be granted to  the following foreigner for 
adoption: 
(a) One who is of unsound mind, 
(b) One who is convicted of a criminal offense involving 
moral turpitude, by a court of Nepal or the concerned 
country. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
where the law of a foreign country provides that a citizen of that 
country may adopt more than one ch ild, he or she may adopt a child 
despite that he or she has a child. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, a person of th e country that prohibits a Nepali citizen from 
adopting a child or pr ovides discrimination between the rights of an 
adopted son or a daught er and the rights of naturally born son or 
daughter shall not be permitted to adopt a child from Nepal. 
193. Provision relating to In ter-country Adoption Board: (1) The 
Government of Nepal may, by a no tification in the Nepal Gazette, 
form an Inter-country Adoption Boar d so as to act as the central
105 
 
agency for the purpos e of making recommendation for granting 
permission to a foreigner for adopti on of a child pursuant to this 
Chapter or designate any govern ment body to perform such 
function. 
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter, the term 
"Board" means the Inter-country Adoption Board, and this term 
includes the government body desi gnated to perform such function. 
(2) The Board referred to in sub-section (1) shall be so 
formed as to include one child ri ght worker who has worked in the 
field of the rights of the chil d for at least fifteen years. 
(3) Other functions, powers an d duties of the Board, in 
addition to those mentioned elsewher e in this Chapter, shall be as 
follows: 
(a) To frame policies on inter-country adoption and 
recommend the same to the Government of Nepal, 
(b) To make coordination between the various 
agencies on matte rs of inter-country adoption, 
(c) To prevent undue financial and other advantage 
likely to be exchanged while giving or taking 
adoption, 
(d) To make available any in formation required by the 
central adoption agencies or other relevant public 
agencies of other countrie s about the condition of 
adopted sons or daughters, 
(e) To prevent child abuse, exploitation, trafficking or 
kidnapping likely to happen in effecting adoption
106 
 
and to protect Nepali ch ildren from any other 
practice likely to harm them, 
(f) To make recommendation  to the Government of 
Nepal to fix the charges applicable for adoption, 
(g) To specify the form of application to be filed for 
adoption, 
(h) To make arrangements for maintaining 
confidentiality of records of the minors desirous to 
be adopted, their biologi cal father and mother or 
adoptive father and mother, 
(i) To carry out such other functions relating to inter-
country adoption as may be required. 
(4) Other matters including the procedures rela ting to the 
meeting of the Board shall be as determined by the Board itself. 
194. Application to be  filed for adoption:  (1) A foreigner or couple 
qualified under Section 192 and de sirous of adopting a Nepali 
minor or a minor of a foreigner domiciled in Nepal shall make an 
application to the Board, accompan ied by the following documents, 
through the embassy of his or he r country in Nepal and where no 
such an embassy is situated in Nepal, the embassy designated for 
Nepal or the central ag ency of the concerned country which gives 
permission for adoption: 
(a) The applicant's birth registration certificate, 
(b) The applicant's recen tly taken photograph, 
(c) A photocopy of the applicant's passport,
107 
 
(d) A document certifying the applicant’s marital 
status, 
(e) A certificate issued by a licensed medical doctor 
on the applicant’s health, 
(f) A certificate issued by the governmental body of 
the concerned country, indicating that the 
applicant is of good ch aracter and has not been 
convicted by a court of  a criminal charge 
involving moral turpitude, 
(g) A document that certifies  the applicant's property 
and income source, 
(h) The applicant's social , psychological and home 
study report, 
(i) Age, sex and other detail s of the child sought for 
adoption, 
(j) A letter of consent issued by the government of 
the applicant’s country for making adoption in 
Nepal, 
(k) A letter of guarantee issu ed by the government of 
the concerned country or by the embassy of that 
country based in Nepal or designated for Nepal 
indicating that according to the law of the 
applicant’s home country, the status of the person 
to be adopted is equal to that of the applicant’s 
biological son or daughter,
108 
 
(l) A letter of guarantee issu ed by the government of 
the applicant's home co untry, embassy of that 
country based in Nepal or designated for Nepal 
indicating that, accordin g to the law of the 
applicant’s home countr y, the applicant is 
qualified to make adoption and has the financial 
capacity to bear all res ponsibilities including 
maintenance, health care, education and protection 
of the minor to be adopted. 
(2) The documents referred to in sub-section (1) shall be 
written in the English language or  translated into  the English or 
Nepali language by a competent body.                              
(3) If it is found, from an inquiry into the application 
received pursuant to sub- section (1), that it is  appropriate to grant 
permission for adoption  according to the appl icant’s request, the 
Board shall, by keepi ng confident the applicant’s name and address, 
forward the details relating ther eto to the selection committee. 
(4) The application to be made  pursuant to sub-section (1) 
shall be accompanied by the appli cation fee as determined by the 
Government of Nepal, on the recommendation of the Board. 
195. Provisions relating to selection committee:  The Government of 
Nepal shall form a selection co mmittee, by a notification in the 
Nepal Gazette, for the purpose of  making recommendations to the 
Board as to which of minors ma y be appropriate for adoption by 
any foreigner or foreign couple, af ter selecting the person or couple 
desirous of making adoption, and the minor.
109 
 
196. To make recommendation by se lecting person effecting 
adoption and child:  The Board shall, base d on the minor’s details 
according to the applicant’s detail s and relevant matters received 
pursuant to sub-section (1) of Sect ion 194, and also having regard 
to the applicant’s request, ascer tain what type of minor is 
appropriate for being adopted by  which applicant and recommend 
the name of the applicant a nd the minor to the Board.  
197. Permission to be granted for adoption:  (1) If the Board considers, 
from an inquiry into the reco mmendation received from the 
selection committee pursuant  to Section 196, that it is appropriate to 
grant a minor as recommended for adoption by a foreigner, it shall 
make according recommendation to  the Government of Nepal. 
(2) If, upon an inquiry into  the recommendation made by 
the Board pursuant to sub-section (1 ), it thinks reasonable to do so, 
the Government of Nepal shall, according to the re commendation of 
the Board, grant permission for th e adoption of such a minor by the 
foreigner. 
(3) After permission has been  granted pursuant to sub-
section (2), the Government of  Nepal shall issue a certificate 
relating thereto for that purpose. 
(4) After the certificate has b een issued pursuant to sub-
section (3), inter-count ry adoption shall be deemed to have duly 
been effected from Nepal. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (2), 
if, prior to granting permission fo r the adoption of any minor by a 
foreigner, the father, mother or ot her guardian of the minor desires
110 
 
to take his or her minor back, su ch a minor may not be granted for 
adoption. 
(6) If the Government of Nepal grants permission for the 
adoption of any minor by a foreigne r pursuant to sub-section (2), 
the applicant shall appear in pers on and take over the concerned 
minor. 
Provided that if the applicant is a couple and either of them is 
unable to appear in person, the ot her spouse may take over such a 
minor on the basis of the certified deed of consent executed by the 
absent spouse. 
(7) After permission has been  granted for the adoption of 
any minor by a foreigner pursuant to this Section, the Government 
of Nepal shall give information thereof to the central agency 
responsible for inter-country adopti on situated in the country of the 
adoptive person and also to the embassy of the concerned country 
designated for Nepal, if any. 
(8) A foreigner or couple making application for adoption 
may, if not satisfied with any d ecision made by the Government of 
Nepal, make an appeal to the concerned High Court. 
198. Special provision re lating to selection of families for minors in 
need of special care:  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
elsewhere in this Chapter, the Bo ard may accord priority to those 
applicants who have applied for th e adoption of minors in need of 
special care and select families to that effect. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term 
“minors in need of sp ecial care” means those mi nors, out of orphan
111 
 
minors or voluntarily abandoned mino rs, who are in ne ed of special 
care due to physical or mental condition, unusual or abnormal 
growth or more age. 
(2) The Board shall determine as  to whether any minor is a 
minor in need of sp ecial care or not. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if, in selecting the families and the minors in need of special care 
pursuant to that sub-section, any detail relating to the age, sex and 
health of the minor as demanded by  a family in the first order of 
priority does not match, those mi nors in need of  special care who 
match to the details as demanded by such family may be selected 
respectively. 
(4) The other procedures on the selection of families for 
minors in need of sp ecial care and classifi cation of such minors 
shall be as prescribed by the Government of Nepal. 
199. Special provision relating to p ermission to be granted for 
adoption: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Chapter, if any renowned foreign citizen desires to adopt any minor 
as referred to in Section 191, he or she may make an application to 
the Board, along with a formal reco mmendation by the head of state, 
head of government or foreign mini ster of the concerned country. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term 
“renowned foreign citizen” means any of the following persons: 
(a) Head of state or head of government of a foreign 
country,
112 
 
(b) Chief of an interna tional intergovernmental 
organization, 
(c) A laureate of the noble prize, 
(d) A person or entrepreneur  who has an income of 
more than three hundred thousand US Dollars a 
year. 
(2)  If the Board considers, from an inquiry into an 
application received pursua nt to sub-section (1), that it is reasonable 
to grant a minor as demanded by such  a foreign citizen for adoption, 
it shall make recommendation to the Government of Nepal, Council 
of Ministers, accordingly. 
(3) If a recommendation is made  pursuant to sub-section 
(2), the Government of Nepal,  Council of Ministers may give 
permission to such a foreign c itizen to adopt the minor demanded 
by him or her. 
(4) Any foreign citizen making  adoption pursuant to this 
Section shall, upon making such adoption, comply with the other 
provisions set forth in this Chapter. 
200. Details to be forwarded:  A foreigner who makes adoption 
pursuant to this Chapte r shall each year forwar d details relating to 
the arrangements he or she has made for the 
maintenance(palanposhan), education, health and care of (herchaha) 
the adopted minor until such minor attains the age of majority 
according to the law of  the concerned country , in each six months 
for a period of two years and thereafter in each year to the 
Government of Nepal through th e Nepali Embassy or Consulate 
based in his or her country or Ne pali mission abroad , and if such
113 
 
mission is not situated there, thro ugh the Embassy of Nepal related 
to such a country. 
201. To monitor:  (1) The Board may itself monitor as to whether a 
foreigner who has adopted a Nepa li minor has made arrangements 
for the maintenance (Palanposhan), health, education and care of 
(Herchaha) such minor until the minor attains the age of majority, 
or for that purpose, form, as  per necessity, a sub-committee 
consisting also of a representa tive of the Nepali Embassy or 
Consulate based in th e concerned country. 
(2) The Board or sub-committee referred to in sub-section 
(1) may, for that purpos e, carry out monitoring by visiting the place 
where the child is residing. 
(3) The Board or sub-committ ee shall submit a report of 
monitoring conducted by it under sub-section (2) to the 
Government of Nepal. 
(4) The report referred to in sub-section (3) shall contain, 
inter alia , a statement whether the best  interests of the adopted 
Nepali minor have been served when he or she is residing with the 
adoptive person or not.  
(5) If the report received pur suant to sub-section (3) 
contains a statement th at the best interests of the adopted Nepali 
minor have not been served when he or she is residing with the 
adoptive person, the Government of Nepal shall, also taking 
opinion of the concerned minor if her or she is able to  express his or 
her opinion or is above  ten years of age, br ing that matter to the
114 
 
attention of the Government of the concerned country through the 
diplomatic channel. 
(6) If the condition of the a dopted Nepali minor is not 
improved even after the attention dr awn pursuant to sub-section (5), 
the Government of Nepal shall,  by a notification in the Nepal 
Gazette, remove such a country fr om the list of countries opened 
for their citizens to make inte r-country adoption from Nepal. 
202. Case may be filed:  A case may be filed in the court of the 
concerned country for the annulme nt of adoption, by a minor 
adopted as an adopted son or daught er within one year after the date 
on which the minor attained majori ty, on the grounds of failure to 
make arrangements for proper maintenance (Palanposhan), health, 
education and care of (Herchaha) him or her, and by the Nepali 
Embassy or Consulate based in th e country where the adopted son 
or daughter is residing within one  year after the date on which the 
adoptive person failed to make such arrangements.  
203. Provisions of the Act to be applicable:  (1)  Provisions contained 
in Sections 173, 174, 175, 178, 17 9, 180, 181 and 183 in relation to 
adopted sons or daughter s shall also apply to the sons or daughters 
adopted by foreigners purs uant to this Chapter. 
(2) Provision of Section 19 1 shall not apply for the 
adoption of the minors of foreigners domiciled in Nepal. 
(3) The Government of Nepal may, on the 
recommendation of the Board, make necessary  Guidelines for the 
implementation of the provisions  contained in this Chapter. 
204. Statute of limitation:  If a separate statute of limitation for making 
a lawsuit is specified in this Chapter, the lawsuit may be made
115 
 
accordingly, and if such  statute of limitation  is not specified, a 
person aggrieved from any act committed or action taken under this 
Chapter may make a lawsuit within one year after the date on which 
such an act was done or action was taken.
116 
 
Chapter-10 
Provisions Relating to Partition  
205. To be deemed coparcener:  For the purposes of  apportionment of a 
property in common, the husband,  wife, father, mother, son and 
daughter shall be deemed to be coparceners, subject to the other 
Sections of this Chapter. 
206. Equal entitlemen t to partition share:  (1) Each copa rcener shall 
have equal entitlement to partition share. 
(2) If a woman coparcener is  pregnant at the time of 
partition, and the baby to be de livered by her is to become a 
coparcener, partition shall be made  by treating also such would be 
born baby as a coparcener and onl y after setting aside his or her 
partition share of property.  
(3) If the pregnant woman under sub-section (2) does not 
deliver a live baby, the partition share set aside fo r such a baby 
shall be divided equally betw een the other coparceners. 
207. Son and daughter born fr om couple whose matrimonial 
relationship is dissolved to obtain partition share:  A son and 
daughter born to a couple who cannot conclude a marriage or 
whose marriage cannot be consider ed valid or whose matrimonial 
relationship is dissolved according to  law shall obtain their partition 
share from such a father and mother. 
208. To obtain partitio n share from mother:   (1) A son and daughter 
whose father is not tr aced out shall obtain thei r partition share from 
the property belonging to  their mother only.
117 
 
(2) A wife kept without ma king public or a son and 
daughter born from her shall not be entitled to claim a partition 
share after the d eath of the husb and or father. 
209. To obtain partit ion share from part of  father or husband: (1) A 
son and daughter child or wives of brothers living in an undivided 
family shall obtain partition sh are only from the part of their 
respective father or husb and, as the case may be.  
(2) If the husband, father or mother dies before effecting 
partition, his wife or his or her ch ild shall obtain the partition share 
to which the husband, father  or mother is entitled. 
(3) If a person has more than  one wife, they shall obtain 
their respective partition share only  from the part of the husband. 
210. Latter wife or child to obtain partition share from part of 
husband or father:  (1) If a person concludes another marriage or a 
child is born from the wife so married, after effecting partition 
between his wife, son, daughter or while he is living together with 
such a wife, son, daughter after mi xing his partition share with that 
of them, such a wife, son or da ughter shall obta in her or his 
partition share only from the part of the property of the husband or 
father, as the case may be. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Chapter, if a person whose wife  is surviving concludes another 
marriage before effecting partition, the partition shar es of the other 
coparcener shall first be set aside and the woman who is so married 
shall be provided with a partition sh are from the part to which he is 
entitled.
118 
 
211. Right to obtain partition share: (1) A husband, wife, father, 
mother, son and daughter having  property in common shall make, 
according to their reputation a nd income, arrangements for the 
maintenance and medical treatment of the wife, husband, son, 
daughter, father and moth er, as the case may be.  
(2) If a person who is bou nd to make arrangements as 
referred to in sub-section (1) fails  to make such arrangements, the 
coparcener is entitled to get se parated by obtaining his or her 
partition share. 
212. Separation may be e ffected at anytime: (1) If there is a mutual 
agreement between the coparcener, they may get separated at any 
time by obtaining their re spective partition share.  
(2) If the husband, father, mo ther or person acting as the 
head of family consider s it appropriate for the coparcener to obtain 
their respective partition share and get separated rath er than living 
in a single family, th e coparcener may get se parated by effecting 
partition at any time. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Act, the term “person 
acting as the head of family” means a person who has attained the 
age of majority pursuant to law an d acts as the head  of family or 
who has the responsibili ty to run the household affairs living in the 
joint family by engaging in farm ing, trade, business or any other 
work in various places. 
213. Husband or wife may get sepa rated by obtaining partition 
share: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 211, the
119 
 
husband or wife may, in any of  the following circumstances, get 
separated at any time by obtainin g his or her partition share: 
(a) If the husband or wife ex pels the wife or husband 
from the house,  
(b) If the husband or wife causes physical or mental 
torture to the wi fe or husband. 
214. Widow may effect separation  by taking her partition share:  (1) 
Notwithstanding anything containe d elsewhere in this Chapter, a 
widow may get separated at any ti me by taking her partition share. 
(2) If a widow concludes anot her marriage, the property 
obtained by her by way of partit ion share shall devolve on the son 
and daughter, if any, born to her from the previous  husband and, if 
there is no such a son or daught er, she herself may retain such 
property. 
215. Relinquishment of partition share: (1) Any coparcener may, by 
executing a deed to  that effect, reli nquish his or her partition share, 
with or without taking his or her partition share in part or taking 
some cash or kind only in consideration for his or her partition 
share.  
(2) While executing a deed on  relinquishment of partition 
share pursuant to sub-section (1), if a coparcener has husband, wife, 
or son or daughter having attained the age of majori ty, the deed on 
relinquishment of partition share shall be deemed to have been 
executed only when consent of such a husband, wife, son or 
daughter has been obtained.
120 
 
Provided that the entitlement of a mi nor coparcener to 
partition share may not be relinquished. 
(3) If a deed on relinquish ment of partit ion share is 
executed pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall be deemed as if he or 
she received his or he r partition share. 
(4) A coparcener shall have  to appear in person for 
executing a deed on re linquishment of partition share or for 
receiving his or he r partition share. 
Provided that if a co parcener is not able to appear in person, 
he or she shall, for th at purpose, appoint an authorized attorney in 
accordance with law. 
216. Partition to  be effected: (1) In partitioning a property in common, 
a deed of partition shall be executed in writing between the 
coparceners, subject  to this Chapter.  
(2) In effecting partition pursua nt sub-section (1), partition 
of property in common and debts in  common shall be so made that 
partition shares th ereof are equal. 
Explanation: For the purposes of hi s Chapter, the term 
"debts in common" mean s any debts agreed to  by the person acting 
as the head of family  or by all coparceners or borrowed by the 
coparceners, who have attained the age of majority and live in the 
undivided family and carry on hou sehold work, farming, trade or 
any other work in various places or  incurred in such transaction or 
incurred in tran saction carried on by the ot her persons, who have 
attained the age of majority and live in the undivided family as to 
which such persons have consented in writing.
121 
 
(3) Partition shall be effected by balancing both high value 
and less value properties, with the consent of all th e coparceners, 
and failing such consent, by a lottery. 
(4) If, in effecting partition, there arises a dispute on any 
property, partition shall be eff ected after the settlement of the 
dispute. 
Provided that if it takes a long time for the settlement of such 
a dispute, the property in dispute may be kept as undivided property 
and the other properties may be partitioned. 
217. Matters to be specified in deed of partition:  The following 
matters shall be specified in  the deed of partition: 
(a) Name, surname, age, a ddress of every coparcener 
and that of his or her mo ther, father, grand-father 
and grand-mother, 
(b) Property to be recei ved by the coparceners, 
(c) If the part of a coparcen er involves debts, moneys 
receivable, amount of such debts and moneys, 
(d) If, upon partition, any co parcener is to live with 
another coparcener, th at details thereof, 
(e) A matter to the effect that  no coparcener has hidden 
or concealed any property subject to partition,  
(f) If any property is to de volve on a coparcener only, 
upon the death of  the father, moth er, husband or 
wife, details thereof,
122 
 
(g) If the partition share of any coparcener is to be 
entrusted to any one,  details thereof, 
(h) Other necessary matters. 
218. Deed of partition to be registered:  (1) In effecting partition, a 
deed of partition shall be drawn up  in presence of witnesses, bear 
signature and thumb-impression of the witness and the coparcener 
and registered in the concerned office, having duly fulfilled the 
legal requirements. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
in cases where partit ion was effected in household making a 
balance between highly valuable  and less valuable property, 
whether or not executing a deed  of partition between any 
coparceners before 10 January 1978 (27 Poush 2034) and a 
coparcener has already taken his or  her partition share and effected 
transmission thereof or the coparcen ers have individually possessed 
or sold or transacted  their respective partition share of immovable 
property according to partition, pa rtition shall be deemed to have 
been effected in spite of being the deed of partition not registered. 
219. Prohibition of providing propert y without effecting partition:  
(1) No person acting as the head of  family shall, without effecting 
partition, provide a property in common to only a coparcener who 
has not taken partition share or  who would be a coparcener. 
  Provided that- 
(1) That such a person may, with the consent of all the 
coparceners, provide any pr operty to any coparcener.
123 
 
(2) That such a person may, even without consent of the 
other coparceners, provide th e property to the extent 
of his or her partition sh are, to any coparcener.  
(2) In effecting partition pursua nt to this Chapter, the other 
property shall be partit ioned by setting off th e property provided to 
a coparcener pursuant to clause (1 ) of the proviso to sub-section (1) 
for the partition share to whic h the coparcener is entitled. 
220. Lawsuit to be filed by se tting out inventory of property:  (1)  If a 
coparcener is desirous of getting separated by setting aside his or 
her partition share, he or she shal l file a lawsuit, specifying therein 
the date of separati on of bread and board from the other 
coparceners and setting out an inve ntory of such property and debts 
and assets held in his or her name and that of the ot her coparceners, 
to the best of his or her knowle dge, as is liable to partition. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "date 
of separation of bread and board" means the following date or day: 
(a) The date mentioned in th e deed of se paration of 
bread and board, 
(b) If there is no deed of separation of bread and 
board, the date as agreed between the 
coparceners on the separati on of bread and board, 
(c) If no agreement is  reached between the 
coparceners pursuant to clause (b), the day 
immediately before the day of filing a lawsuit, 
(d) Except as otherwise agr eed upon, in the case of a 
married daughter, the day of her marriage.
124 
 
(2) If the deed of separation of  bread and board is executed 
between any coparceners only, such  a deed shall co me into force 
only on the date of its registration.  
(3) If the person filing a lawsu it pursuant to sub-section (1) 
is unable to submit the inventory of  property, he or she shall also 
specify the reason therefor. 
(4) If a lawsuit is fi led pursuant to s ub-section (1), the 
concerned person also shall submit a statement of de fense, together 
with a statement whethe r the plaintiff is to be provided with a 
partition share or not and if he or  she agrees to provide a partition 
share, together with an  inventory of the proper ty held in his or her 
name and the debts and assets. 
221. Matters to be set out in inventory:  (1) The following matters shall 
be set out in the inve ntory of the property to  be submitted pursuant 
to this Chapter: 
(a) The place of location of  land, plot No., area and 
approximate value thereof, 
(b) In the case of a house, place of location, plot no, 
area, Kabal (rooms), Naal (size),  storey of the 
house, whether it is conc retely built or mud made, 
and approximate value thereof, 
(c) In the case of a mova ble property, details and 
approximate value thereof, 
(d) In the case of cash, detail s thereof, and also details 
of bank balance, share, de benture, treasury bills, if 
any,
125 
 
(e) In the case of livestoc k, details and approximate 
value thereof, 
(f) In the case of go ld, silver and jewe lries, details and 
approximate value thereof, 
(g) In the case of a moto r vehicle, details and 
approximate valu e thereof,  
(h) Details and approximate va lue of the properties, if 
any, other than those referr ed to clauses (a) through 
(g). 
(2) If the value of any property  is not set out pursuant to 
sub-section (1) or a dis pute arises as to the va lue thereof, the court 
shall take the basis of the price fixed by the Land Revenue Office, 
in the case of an imm ovable property, and of the prevailing market 
price for the time being, in th e case of a movable property. 
222. Partition to be effected  by taking inventory: (1) If it appears from 
the lawsuit filed or statement of  defense submitted pursuant to 
Section 220 that partitio n requires to be eff ected and an inventory 
of property is submitted along wi th the lawsuit or statement of 
defense, the court shal l effect partition, ha ving the coparceners 
executed a deed stating, inter alia , that the property they have 
submitted is the only property to be  partitioned and that they have 
not concealed or hidden  any other property.  
(2) If an inventory of property  is not submitted along with 
the lawsuit or statement of defense,  the court shall, by specifying a 
time-limit, require the coparceners to submit the inventory of the 
property and effect partition by causing the coparcen ers to execute
126 
 
a deed pursuant to sub- section (1),  if the coparceners submit such 
an inventory within the time-limit so specified. 
223. Partition to be effected on the basi s of inventory received:  (1) If 
a person who in to submit an invent ory of property within the time-
limit referred to in Section 222 fa ils to submit the inventory or has 
elapsed the time-limit without submitting a statement of defense, 
the court shall effect partition on the basis of the inventory of the 
property submitted by  other coparceners. 
(2) If the partition is  effected pursuant to sub-section (1), 
no lawsuit may be entertained on the ground of dissat isfaction with 
the partition share. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (2), 
if a lawsuit is filed for the partitio n of a property not set out in the 
inventory of the property su bmitted by the coparceners but 
discovered subsequently , the court shall effect partition of that 
property. 
224. Power to take  inventory by breaking padlock:  If, because of the 
failure of a person to submit an in ventory of the pr operty required 
to be submitted by him or her, the inventory of property has to be 
taken by breaking the padlock of the house custody  of which is 
taken by him or her, the court may, by opening the padlock in 
presence also of the pers on holding the key of the house, if he or 
she is present, and if not, in presence of at least two persons 
including the person requesti ng for partition share and a 
representative of the concerned wa rd of the Local Level, take an 
inventory of the property found there, by maintaining a record 
thereof.
127 
 
225. Partition to be effected when inventory produced:  (1) If the 
person who has to submit an invent ory fails to submit the inventory 
or lapses the time-limit by not submitting a statement of defense 
and the person filing a lawsuit re questing for the partition of 
property also fails to submit the inventory of property, the court 
shall, by causing the person filing the lawsuit to ex ecute a deed of 
the same statement, ab ate the lawsuit subject to the condition that 
the partition shall be e ffected at the time when  an inventory of the 
property is produced. 
(2) If a lawsuit is abated purs uant to sub-section (1) and 
the person filing the lawsu it makes a petition subsequently, 
accompanied by an inventory, th e court shall effect partition 
between the coparceners in accordance with law,  on the basis of the 
previous case-file itself. 
226. Prohibition of concealing  or hiding property: (1) No person shall 
conceal or hide a property that is liable to partition.  
(2) If a coparcener is subseque ntly held to have concealed 
or hidden any property which is held  in his or her name and is liable 
to partition, at the time of effec ting partition or at the time when 
asked by the court to submit an inventory, the coparcener so 
concealing or hiding the property shall have no right to obtain such 
property.  
(3) The property con cealed or hidden under sub-section (2) 
shall be partitioned between  the other coparceners.  
227. Partition share to be reimbursed:  If a coparcener is not allowed 
to own and possess any property fall ing in his or her partition share
128 
 
due to the property being defectiv e under law, all the coparceners 
shall proportionately reimburse to him or her property equal to the 
defective property. 
228. Partition share not to be exchanged:  Except in the case of mutual 
consent among the coparceners, no coparcener shall be entitled to 
exchange any prope rty received by him or her by way of partition 
for the reason that after partition it  is disordered, damaged or he or 
she does not prefer it. 
229. Partition of pledged or  mortgaged property: (1) If a coparcener 
is found to have pledged or mortga ged a property that is liable to 
partition, the court shal l, if all the coparcen ers so agree, effect 
partition of the property by causing the property to be released from, 
or on the condition of having an obligation to release it from, the 
property in common.  
(2) If all the coparceners do  not agree pursuant to sub-
section (1) and the court finds that the person acting as the head of 
family has pledged or mortgaged the property or that the other 
persons having attained majority living in the undivided family 
have, taking signature and thumb-impression also of the person 
acting as the head of family, pl edged or mortgaged it, the court 
shall effect partition of the property by causing the property to be 
released from, or on the condition of having an obligation to release 
it from, the property in common.  
(3) Save in the cases referred to in sub-section (1 ) or (2), if 
a coparcener is found to have pledged or mortgaged a property 
liable to partition, the court shal l effect partition by causing the 
property to be released from, or  on the conditi on of having an
129 
 
obligation to release it from, the property falling in his or her 
partition share. 
230. Power to withhold  property or income until partition is 
effected: If one filing a la wsuit appears to obtai n a partition share 
in a case of partition and, after th e inventory of property has been 
submitted, makes a petition to the cour t, praying that the property to 
the extent of his or her partition share or income thereof be 
withheld, the court may withhold the property to the extent of his or 
her partition share or income of such property until partition is 
effected in the fulfillment of the legal requirements. 
231. Partition to be so ef fected as to have provision of way or 
passage: While effecting partition, if  there is no access to way or 
passage to a house or land partitio ned to a coparcen er and if such 
way or passage can be managed fr om the land of other coparcener, 
partition shall be so effected th at the concerned coparcener shall 
have to provide the way or passage for access to such house or land. 
232. Debtor not to be specified without consent of creditor: (1) 
Partition shall not be so effected as to give the responsibility of 
payment of the debt of joint fam ily to a sole co parcener without 
consent of the creditor.  
(2) Even if the responsibility of payment of the debt is 
given solely to any coparcener cont rary to sub-section (1), all the 
coparceners shall pay the debt in common equally, if the creditor 
does not so agree. 
233. Compensation to be pa id if lawsuit filed by  person not entitled 
to partition:  If a person who is not enti tled to receive a partition
130 
 
share is held to have filed a laws uit for receiving it, the court shall 
order the law-suit filing person to pay to the defendant a reasonable 
compensation, having regard to the amount in controversy, if set 
out from the case-file, and if such  amount is not set out, to the 
status of such a person.  
234. Partition share, money or ex penditure may be awarded: (1) If a 
person who is entitled to obta in a partition share, money or 
expenditure from any person accord ing to the judgment, files, 
having failed to so r eceive, a petition in the court of first instance 
which has passed judgment  in the case, the court shall, if the parties 
are the same, cause th e partition, m oney or expenditure according 
to the judgment to be awar ded as soon as possible.  
(2) If the partition share, e xpenditure or money is not 
provided pursuant to sub-section (1 ), the person w ho has to provide 
the partition share, money or expe nditure shall be caused to pay a 
reasonable compensation as  well to the petitioner. 
235. Statute of  limitation: A person who is ag grieved from any act 
done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit as 
follows: 
(a) Any time, where partition has never been effected 
or a common general deed has been executed in 
effecting partition and even though there is no deed 
where both the parties have enjoyed the property 
upon making calculation, 
(b) Within three months from th e date of partition if 
one is not satisfied with such partition,
131 
 
(c) In case of concealing or hi ding of prope rty, till the 
life of the concerned coparcener, 
(d)  In the cases other than that  referred to in clauses (a), 
(b) and (c), within six m onths after the date on 
which such an act was done or action taken. 
236. Partition deemed to be executed: (1) A partition effected pursuant 
to the law prior to th e commencement of this Act shall be deemed 
to have been effected  pursuant to this Act.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if a person has taken ma intenance for living ( Jiuni) in consideration 
for his or her partition share prior to the commencement  of this Act, 
the person shall be deemed to have taken his or her partition share.
132 
 
Chapter-11 
Provisions Relating  to Succession 
237. Succession deem ed to be opened: Upon the death of a person, 
succession to his or her property shall be deemed to be opened. 
  Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter, the term 
"succession" means devolu tion of liabilities and rights in regard to 
debt, wealth and property of the deceased upon his or her heirs in 
accordance with law. 
238. Heir entitl ed to succession: Where succession to a person's 
property is opened, his or her nearest heir shal l be entitled to such 
succession. 
239. Order of preference of heirs for succession:  (1) The order of 
preference of nearest he irs for succession shall,  subject to the other 
Sections of this Chap ter, be as follows: 
(a) Husband or wife living in the undivided family, 
(b) Son, daughter, widow daug hter-in-law living in the 
undivided family, 
(c) Father, mother , step mother, gr and-son, grand-
daughter, grand-daughter-in- law, on the side of son 
or daughter, living in the undivided family, 
(d) Separated husband, wife , son, daughter, father, 
mother, step-mother, 
(e) Separated grand-son, gran d-daughter from the son's 
generation, 
(f) Separated grand-father, grand-mother,
133 
 
(g) Grand-father, grand-moth er, elder brother, younger 
brother, elder sister, younger sister, widow elder 
brother’s wife or younger brother’s wife living in 
the undivided family, 
(h) Uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, living in the joint 
family, 
(i) Separated elder brother,  younger brother, elder 
sister, younger sister, widow elder brother's wife or 
younger brother's wife. 
(2) So long as the person w ho is in the first order of 
preference referred to  in sub-section (1) at the time when 
succession to one’s prop erty is open is servin g the person in the 
subsequent order of preference shal l not be entitled  to succession.  
(3) If there are more than one heir in the same order of 
preference pursuant to su b-section (1), all of them shall equally be 
entitled to the succession. 
(4) If any heir in the orde r of preference entitled to 
succession does not inte nd to succeed, the othe r heirs in the same 
order shall be entitled to succession, and even any heir in that order 
of preference does not intend to accept succession , the heir in the 
successive order of pr eference shall be enti tled to the succession. 
240. Distant heir en titled to succession:  If a person dies  when he or she 
was staying with any distant heir after taking his or her partition 
share of property in spite of having his or her nearer heir and 
succession to him or her is open, the heir with whom that person 
was so staying shall be entitled to his or he r property succession.
134 
 
241. Maintaining (Shyahar samhar)  and  caretaking heir entitled to 
succession: If a nearer heir has not maintained and taken care of a 
person but a distant heir has done  so, the distant heir who has so 
maintained and taken care of hi m or her shall be entitled to 
succession. 
242. Separated heir entitled to succession: (1) If a person dies when 
that person was staying with a ny heir who has lived separately, 
after taking his or her partition share of property , because an un-
separated heir has not maintained (Shyahar samhar)  and taken care 
of that person, such separated heir  shall be entitled to the succession 
of that person. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if a person dies when that person  was staying with any heir only for 
few days, without taking his or he r partition share of property, the 
heir with whom that person had so stayed shall not be entitled to 
succession of that person. 
243. Maintaining (Shyahar samhar)  and  caretaking pers on entitled 
to succession: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in 
this Chapter, if another person has maintained (Shyahar samhar)  
and taken care of the d eceased because the heir has not done so, the 
person who has so maintained (Shyahar samhar)   and taken care of 
shall be entitled to  such succession.  
244. Not to be obliged to accept succession:  (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained else where in this Chapter,  no person shall be 
obliged to accept a succession.
135 
 
(2) A person who declines to accept a succession shall 
give information thereof in writi ng to the concerned District Court 
within a period of three years of the devolution of succession. 
(3) If a person does not accept a succe ssion within the 
period referred to in sub-section (2), such succession shall be 
deemed to have been devolved upon  the other heir in the successive 
order of preferen ce for succession.  
(4) Even if a person does no t accept a succession pursuant 
to sub-section (1), he or she sha ll have to conduct obsequies of the 
deceased in accordan ce with the rites and rituals. 
245. Disqualified for succession:  Notwithstanding anything contained 
elsewhere in this Chapter, if a pe rson who kills, or  causes the death 
of, another person with intent to  serve any premed itation or with 
ulterior motive to obtain succession , such person and the heir to the 
person who so kills or causes deat h shall be disqualified from the 
succession of the deceased  or his or her heir. 
246. Obligations and rights of pers on upon whom succession is 
devolved: (1) The obligations and rights  of the person upon whom 
succession is devolved shall be as follows: 
(a) To perform, or cause to be performed, funeral and 
obsequies rites of the d eceased according to his or 
her rites and rituals, 
(b) To repay the debt borrowe d by the deceased to the 
creditor, 
(c) To have right over the debt lent and investment 
made by the deceased.
136 
 
(2) If the funeral and obsequ ies rites of a deceased has 
been performed by a person other than one who is entitled to the 
succession, the person so  entitled shall pay the costs incurred in the 
performance of funeral and obse quies rites of the deceased and 
additional twenty-five percent of such costs to the person who has 
performed such rites. 
Provided that if any person has, instead of doing on his or her 
own, caused another person to perform the funeral and obsequies 
rites of the deceased, he or she sha ll be liable to pay only the actual 
costs incurred in the perf ormance of such rites. 
247. Creditor may recover debt:  If succession to one’s property is 
opened and one has creditors, su ch creditors may recover their 
debts and liabilities from the pe rson upon whom succession has 
devolved. 
       Provided that no heir shall be obliged to pay debts and liabilities 
in excess of the deceas ed's property succeeded  to by him or her. 
248. Local Level to receive property under succession:  (1) If 
succession to the propert y of a person is opene d and he or she has 
no heir or his or her heir declines to accep t such succession, the 
property of the dead person re maining after deducting the costs 
incurred in the performa nce of his or her fune ral and obsequies rites 
and even after payment of debts due to his or her cr editors shall be 
devolved on the Local Level. 
(2) If a person dies and has no heir but has property, a 
person who performs his or her ob sequies or maintains his or her
137 
 
books and accounts shall immediately give a notice ther eof to the 
Local Level. 
(3) If a notice is received purs uant to sub-se ction (2), the 
Local Level shall prepare an inve ntory of the properties of the 
deceased in witness of at two local persons and forward the 
inventory, accompanied by a copy of the me morandum (Muchulka) 
executed to that effect, to the concerned district level administrative 
office.  
(4) If a memorandum, along with the inventory of 
properties, is received pu rsuant to sub-section (3) and the address of 
the deceased is traced out, such an office sh all send a notice in 
accordance with law to th e heir of the deceased to appear to receive 
the property of the deceased within a peri od of three months. 
(5) If the heir does no t accept the property  pursuant to sub-
section (1) or the heir of the d eceased does not appear within the 
time-limit referred to in sub-sectio n (4) or the addres s of such heir 
is not traced out, such an office shall publish a notice in a national 
newspaper, inviting his or her heir , if any, to app ear to claim the 
property of the deceas ed, within a period of thirty five days. 
(6) If the heir of the deceased appears within the time-limit 
referred to in sub-section (5),  the property that remains after 
deducting therefrom the expenses incurred in  the performance of 
obsequies of the deceased  or providing such ex penses to the person 
having performed such obsequies, and ten percent of the property, 
shall be returned to  the concerned heir.
138 
 
(7) If no heir of the deceased  appears within the time-limit 
referred to in sub-section (5) or hi s or her address is not traced out, 
the property that remains after deducting therefrom the expenses 
incurred in the perfo rmance of obsequies of  the deceased, which 
amount is to be provided to the person having performed such 
obsequies, shall devolve on the concerned Local Level. 
(8) The concerned heir or th e office under sub-section (3) 
shall hand over the pr operty receivable by th e Local Level pursuant 
to sub-section (1) or (7) to the Local Level in accordance with law. 
(9) The Local Level shall us e the property that it has 
received pursuant to this Section for public interest. 
249. Succession to property of foreigner died in Nepal:  (1) If a 
foreigner who dies in Nepal has pr operty without heir in Nepal, a 
person who performs his or her ob sequies or maintains his or her 
books and accounts shall immediately give a notice ther eof to the 
nearby Local Level. 
(2) If a notice is received purs uant to sub-se ction (1), the 
Local Level shall prepare an inve ntory of the properties of the 
deceased in witness of at two local persons and forward the 
inventory, accompanied by a copy of the me morandum (Muchulka) 
executed to that effect, to the concerned district level administrative 
office. 
(3) If a memorandum, along with the inventory of 
properties, is received pursuant to sub-secti on (2), such an office 
shall immediately give information thereof to the Federal Ministry 
of Home Affairs.
139 
 
(4) If information refe rred to in sub-section (3) is received, 
the Federal Ministry of Home Affa irs shall also send a notice, in 
accordance with law, through th e diplomatic channel of the 
concerned country, to th e heir of the dead pe rson to appear to 
receive the properties of the deceased within four months. 
(5) If information un der sub-section (3) is received upon 
the death of a citizen of a country having no  diplomatic relation 
with Nepal, the Federal Ministry of Home Affairs shall publish a 
notice in a national da ily English newspape r for receiving such 
property within six months, and the Federal Ministry of Home 
Affairs shall also put su ch notice on its website. 
(6) If the heir of the deceased appears within the time-limit 
referred to in sub-section (4) or (5 ), the property th at remains after 
deducting therefrom the expenses incurred in  the performance of 
obsequies of the dead person or pr oviding such expenses the person 
having performed such obsequies, and ten percent of the property, 
shall be returned to  the concerned heir. 
(7) If no heir of the dead person appears within the time-
limit referred to in sub- section (4) or (5) or hi s or her address is not 
traced out, the property that remain s after providing the expenses 
incurred in the perfo rmance of obsequies of  the deceased to the 
person having performed such obseq uies shall devolve on the Local 
Level. 
(8) The property received by the Local Level pursuant to 
this Section shall be used only for public interest.
140 
 
250. Statute of limitation:  A lawsuit may be made within the statute of 
limitation, if any, set forth elsewh ere in this Chapter, and in the 
other cases, within a period of thr ee years after the date on which 
the succession is opened.
141 
 
Part-4 
Laws Relating to Property 
Chapter-1 
General Provisions Re lating to Property 
251. Deemed to be property:  Any cash, goods or wo rk shall be deemed 
to be a property if such cash, goods or action can be used or 
transacted in or the title thereto can be transferred by way of 
purchase, sale or otherw ise or any benefit can be derived therefrom. 
Explanation: Except otherwise provided for in this Act, the 
term "goods" means a  physical property capable of being purchased 
or sold. 
252. Property deemed to be in  movable or immovable form: A 
property shall be deemed to be in either movable or immovable 
form irrespective of it s physical or non-ph ysical, tangible or 
intangible form. 
253. Property deemed to be immovable: (1) The following property 
shall be deemed to be  an immovable property:  
(a) A building or land or structure fixed thereto, 
(b) Any goods attached to  a building or land 
permanently, 
(c) A mine, stone or mineral embedded in land, 
(d) Natural water, surface water and underground 
water, 
(e) A building or other structure so made permanently 
that it can float over a river, lake or pond,
142 
 
(f) A standing tree, plant or  fruit tree or fruit or 
flower growing on such a tr ee, plant or fruit tree or 
crops in the land, or 
(g) A movable property att ached to an immovable 
property. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if any structure, goods or  any part thereof, fixe d or attached to any 
immovable property gets or is de tached or unfixed in any manner, 
the structure, goods or part so detached or un fixed shall be deemed 
to be a movable property. 
254. Property deemed to be movable: The following property shall be 
deemed to be a movable property:  
(a) Cash or goods that can be transacted as cash or foreign 
currency, 
(b) Gold, silver, jewelry, Ratna, gold or silver  ornament or 
precious stone, 
(c) Other good that can be  moved from one place to 
another, except those referred  in clause (a) or (b), 
(d) A bond, security, promisso ry note, bill of exchange, 
letter of credit or other negotiable instrument or a 
benefit derived therefrom, 
(e) Intellectual property, 
(f) A right in  security, 
(g) A trade good-will or franchise,
143 
 
(h) A property other than the immovable property. 
255. Classification of prop erty according to ownership: The property 
shall, according to the ownership and the form of use thereof be 
classified as follows: 
(a) Private property, 
(b) Property in common, 
(c) Joint property, 
(d) Community property, 
(e) Public property, 
(f) Government property, 
(g) Trust property. 
256. Property deemed to  be private property: (1) Any of the 
following propert ies owned by a ny person or properties accrued 
therefrom shall be deemed  to be a private proper ty of such a person:  
(a) Property earned by way of his or her knowledge, 
skills or effort, 
(b) Property acquired by way of donation, bequeath, 
or succession, 
(c) Property acquired by wa y of a lottery or gift, 
(d) Property acquired by  way of remuneration, 
gratuity, pension, medical expense, provident fund, 
insurance or other social security,
144 
 
(e) Property acquired by way of intellectual property 
or royalty, 
(f) Property acquired in a ny manner whatsoever while 
living apart by separating bread and board in 
accordance with law or while managing one’s 
accommodation at one’s cost  despite not so living 
apart, 
(g) Property earned or acquired by a woman prior to 
marriage or acquired from he r parental side at the 
time of marriage or  accrued therefrom, 
(h) Property so granted to a woman by the husband or 
with consent of all copa rceners of the husband 
side that she will have exclusive right in it or 
movable or immovable prop erty received from the 
relatives or friends  of the husband side and 
property accrued therefrom, 
(i) Property which, according to law, is considered to 
be the exclusive private property of a person.  
(2) Any person shall be entitl ed to exclusively deal with 
his or her private property,  subject to this Act. 
257. Property deemed to  be property in common:  (1) Any of the 
following properties or  property accrued theref rom shall be deemed 
to be the property in common, irre spective of such property being 
owned by any coparcener whosoever, out of the coparceners, 
subject to Section 256: 
(a) Property inherited from ancestors,
145 
 
(b) Property owned by the co parceners except  the private 
property, 
(c) Property earned by the copa rceners from the farming, 
industry, trade or business  in common or property 
accrued therefrom. 
(2) Except where separated in  accordance with  law, any 
property earned by the husband or wife or property accrued 
therefrom shall be deem ed to be the proper ty in common of the 
husband or wife.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Chapter, any property  earned by the parents for the purpose of 
partition between the parents and their children shall also be 
deemed to be the pr operty in common. 
(4) The use of, and transfer of right in, the property in 
common and other provis ions shall be as se t forth in the other 
Chapters of this Act. 
258. Property deemed to be joint property: (1) Any property owned 
by two or more persons except the coparceners living in a joint 
family or property accrued therefro m shall be deemed to be a joint 
property. 
(2) The right or share of a joint holder in  the joint property 
shall be as set forth in a deed setti ng out such rights  and share, and 
failing such a deed, the holders of that property shall be deemed to 
have equal rights and share.
146 
 
(3) The use and management of , transfer of title to, and 
other provisions relating to, the join t property shall be governed by 
this Chapter and the other Chapters of this Act. 
259. Trees, plants or goods on boundary to be deemed joint 
property: Except as otherwise proved, the trees, plants or goods 
lying on the boundary of two or more owners of adjoining lands 
shall be deemed to be the jo int property of all owners. 
260. Management, protection and ma intenance of joint property:  (1) 
The management, protection and ma intenance of a joint property 
shall be made as per the consent of the owne rs of that property. 
(2) Failing consent between the owners in relation to the 
management, protection and main tenance of a joint property 
pursuant to sub-section (1), the management, protection and 
maintenance of the joint property shall be made according to the 
decision of majority members. 
(3) Failing a majority opinion between the owners in 
relation to the management, protect ion and maintenance of the joint 
property pursuant to sub-section (2), the owner who has the largest 
right or share in that proper ty shall make its management, 
protection and maintenance. 
Provided that if the owners have  equal right, all owners shall 
have to make management, prot ection and mainte nance of such 
property on an equal basis. 
(4) Expenses incurred in th e management, protection and 
maintenance of the joint proper ty, if any, made by any owner
147 
 
pursuant to sub-section (2) or (3 ) shall be borne by all owners in 
proportion to their resp ective right or share. 
(5) The owner who does not manage, protect and maintain 
the joint property pursu ant to sub-section (4) shall pay the expenses 
incurred in the management, prot ection and maintenance of that 
property to the owner who has ma de such management, protection 
and maintenance within a period of one year. 
(6) If any owner fails to pay the expenses in curred in the 
management, protection and main tenance of the joint property 
within the period referred to in su b-section (5), the owner who has 
made management, protection and maintenance thereof shall be 
entitled to purchase the right and sh are of that other owner in that 
property at the prevaili ng price. Such purchase r of the joint property 
may deduct management and mainte nance expenses of his or her 
portion. 
261. Prohibition of alteration in joint property without consent:  Any 
alteration in a joint prop erty or any change in its form may not be 
made without consent of all the owners of the joint property.  
262. Legal action or defense may be made by any owner of joint 
property: (1) If it is necessary to inst itute a legal ac tion against any 
person or defend a cas e in relation to the protection of a joint 
property, all owners shall make such institution or defense. 
(2) If all owners are not availa ble as referred to in sub-
section (1), any owner may, on be half of him or her or the other 
owners, institute legal action agains t any person or defend any case.
148 
 
263. Separation of one’s share from joint property:  (1) Any owner of 
a joint property may separate his or  her right or share therein from 
the other owners at any time. 
(2) The separation of a joint property referred to in sub-
section (1) shall be e ffected in accord ance with the consent of all 
the owners. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) 
or (2), if the separation of any joint property results either in a 
substantial loss to the other owners or in a disorder in the form of 
that property, su ch separation may not be made. 
(4) If any joint property canno t be separated owing to the 
circumstance referred to in sub-s ection (3), the owners of that 
property shall sell su ch property and divide  the proceeds of sale 
between them in proportion to their respective right and share 
therein. 
(5) If any joint property cannot be sold in ac cordance with 
sub-section (4) or all the owners do not agree to sell it and any 
owner intends to buy such property , such an owner may exclusively 
own it by paying the price of that  property to the other owners in 
the same proportion. 
(6) If more than one owner in tend to buy the joint property 
pursuant to sub-section (5), the ow ner who agrees to pay the highest 
price shall be entitled to purchase such property.  
264. Provisions relating to communit y, public, govern ment and trust 
properties: The provisions relating to, and ownership, use, 
management, and transfer of right in, and other provisions of, the
149 
 
community, public, government and trust properties shall be as set 
forth in the other Chap ters of this Act.  
265. Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or 
action taken under this  Chapter may make a lawsuit within six 
months after the date on which su ch an act was done or action was 
taken.
150 
 
Chapter-2 
Provisions Relating to Ow nership and Possession 
266. Ownership to be deemed: If a person acquires the right in any 
property in accordance with law, his or he r ownership in that 
property shall be deemed.  
288. Right of owner: Any person, in capacity of the owner of any 
property, shall have the follow ing right, subject to laws:  
(a) To use the property, 
(b) To sell or otherwise transfer the title to the property to 
any other person, 
(c) To mortgage or pledge the property in any manner, 
(d) To deal in the property, 
(e) To take benefits of th e property in any manner 
whatsoever, 
(f) To make any kind of physical  structure, wall or fence 
or delimit boundary, in his or her land or change the 
form of any property or otherwise protect it, 
(g) To use his or her land or pa rt below its surface or goods 
therein or sky above its surface, 
(h) To destroy or dispose of property in any manner, 
(i) To institute a legal action in  any manner in relation to 
the acquisition or security of the property. 
268. Possessory ri ght to be deemed:  If a person hold s a property with 
him or her lawfully with inten tion to possess the property, the 
person shall be deemed to have  the possessory right over such 
property.  
269. When possessory right can be acquired: (1) The possessory right 
may be acquired over any prop erty in the following manner:
151 
 
  (a) By holding the property in the capacity of its owner, 
(b) By acquiring the property owned by another person, in 
accordance with law, 
(c) By obtaining consent to  have possessory right. 
(2) Only the possessory right which is acquired in good 
faith, peacefully or ope nly shall be deemed to  have been acquired 
lawfully. 
270. Person competent to acquire posses sory right: (1) A person may 
acquire the possessory right either in person or through his or her 
agent. 
(2) A person who is incompet ent or quasi-competent may 
acquire the possessory right through his or her guardian or curator. 
271. Rights of possessor: (1) A person, in the cap acity of a possessor, 
shall, subject to law, have the following rights:  
(a) To uninterruptedly possess the property in his or her 
possession, subject to the laws  in force or the contract, 
if any, entered into in relation to the property, 
(b) To use any benefits of the property in his or her 
possession. 
(2) In the event of acquisi tion of, by a person, the 
possessory right in bona  fide over any proper ty owned by anyone 
else, the person shall be entitled to reimbursement from the owner 
of that property for essential expe nses incurred in the management, 
maintenance or care of (rekh dekh)  such property while it was 
under his or her possessory right. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), 
the former possessor shal l be entitled to retain  such property with
152 
 
him or her unless and until the e xpenses referred to in that sub-
section are reimbursed. 
(4) If a bona fide possessor of  any property not in his or 
her ownership has a ttached any goods to such property, the 
possessor shall be entitled to de tach or take out the goods so 
attached by him or he r from the property without tempering with 
such property. 
272. Circumstances when posse ssory right is extinguished:  The 
possessory right of a pe rson over a property shall be deemed to 
have been extinguish ed in any of the fo llowing circumstances:    
  (a) If the person abandons the property, 
  (b) If the person transfers the property, 
  (c) If the property gets totally destroyed or becomes 
useless.  
273. Adverse possessory right to be deemed:  (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained elsewh ere in this Chapter,  if any person has 
possessed any movable property or land ow ned by anyone else, 
since more than three y ears ago in the case of  the movable property 
and thirty years ago in th e case of the land as if  the property or land 
were owned by himself or herself, that person shall be deemed to 
have adverse possessory right ove r such property or land.  
  Provided that: 
(1) No adverse possessory right may be acquired 
over a government, public, community or trust 
land despite the lengt h of the period of 
possession. 
(2) Where a contract or other law provides for 
separate provisions in rela tion to any property or
153 
 
land, such provisions shall be applicable to such 
property or land. 
(2) If any person acquires the adverse possessory right 
over any property pursuant to su b-section (1), the person may 
obtain ownership over such pr operty in his or her name. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if a property or land is possessed without knowledge of its owner, 
secretly or forcibly, this  Section shall not apply. 
(4) In computing the period purs uant to this Section, it 
shall be computed from the date of the commencement of this Act. 
274. Compensation to be paid: (1) If any person possesses any 
property forcibly, with mala fide intention or secretly, the person 
shall return the benefits derived from that posses sion and such 
property to the concerned person and pay a reasonable 
compensation for any lo ss caused to the property due to his or her 
negligence in the course of  possessing such property.  
(2) If any property owned by a nyone else is lost or 
damaged during the continuance of the possessory right of a person 
over the property, the person sh all pay compensation for such 
property to the concerned person. 
275. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggr ieved from any act 
done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit 
within three months after the date  of knowledge of commission of 
such act or action.
154 
 
Chapter-3 
Provisions Relating to Uses of Property  
276. Prohibition of use, tempera nce or acquisition of other's 
property: (1) No person shall use othe r's property wi thout consent 
of that other person. 
(2) No person shall temper w ith other's property by closing 
the road or exit of th e other person or doing any act or construction 
on the border of his or her land or otherwise. 
(3) No person shall acquire  other's property without 
consent of that person. 
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in accordance 
with law, acquire property of a ny person for public interest.  
(4) No person shall enter other's house and compound 
without consent of any person except in accordan ce with law. 
277. Property to be inviolable: (1) No person shall en croach or trespass 
other's property by way of over lapping, pressing or otherwise.  
(2) If any person takes posse ssion of other's property by 
way of any act referred to in sub-section (1), that person shall be 
deemed to have encr oached or trespass ed such property. 
278. Safety measures to be adopted: A person shall, while doing any 
work on his or her house or land, ad opt safety measures in order to 
avoid any loss or damage or eff ect to the neighbor's house or land 
in any manner. 
  Provided that, except  where a business tr ansaction is carried 
on by any neighbor, matters such as gas, smell, smoke or noise of
155 
 
general nature emitted or produced from the use by th e neighbor of 
his or her house or land shall not be deemed to ha ve caused a loss 
or damage or effect to  the house or land.  
279. Prohibition of building a hous e in other's land without consent:  
(1) No person shall build a hous e in a land without obtaining 
written consent of the owner of that land. 
(2) If any person builds a house in a land without 
obtaining written consent of the ow ner of that land, the land-owner 
may, if he or she so desires, pu rchase the house on  payment of the 
price that is less by up to twenty-f ive percent of the market price of 
that house. 
(3) If the land-owner does not purchase such house 
pursuant to sub-section (2), the house-owner may, if the owner so 
consents, purchase the land on paym ent of the price that is higher 
by up to twenty-five percent of th e market price of  the land where 
the house is located. 
(4) If both parties do not agr ee to purchase and sell the 
house or land pursuant to sub-sect ion (2) or (3), the person who has 
built the house shall demolish the house and take away his or her 
materials within a period of three months of the date on which the 
house was so built. 
(5) If the house is not de molished within the period 
referred to in sub-section (4), such a house sha ll belong to the 
landowner. 
280. To leave land while putting window:  If a person or government 
body has to build a house by put ting a window or door towards the
156 
 
neighbor's land, the pers on or body shall leav e the land according to 
the standards specified by the concerned body. 
281. Prohibition of channeling water of house or roof:  No person 
shall channel the water of his or he r house or roof to other's house 
or land or a public road. 
282. Prohibition of making safety tank  adjoining to ne ighbor's land:  
(1) No person shall construct a safety tank by adjoining it to the 
neighbor's land. 
(2) If a person has to construct a safety tank in his or her 
land, he or she shall leave at least the land according to the 
standards specified by the concer ned body, except in cases where 
the neighbor's consent is available. 
283. To leave land while digging well or Kuwa: In digging a well or a 
small ( Kuwa) in one's land, one shall l eave the land so that the 
distance of at least one meter can be maintained from the 
neighbor’s land. 
284. Prohibition of planting tree s or plants causing effect: (1) No 
person shall plant a tree or plants in such a way so that it causes 
effects to other's house, land or property.  
(2) If any tree or plant planted by a person in one's land 
cause any effect by expanding to ot her's house, land or property, the 
person who has planted such tree or plants shall cut the branches or 
roots of the tree or plant in such  manner as not to cause loss or 
damage to that person's house, land or property. 
(3) If a person who has planted such tree or plants fails to 
cut off the branches or roots of the tree or pl ants pursuant to sub-
157 
 
section (2), the person who is a ffected therefrom may cut off the 
branches or roots of such tree or plants on his or her own. 
285. Compensation to be recovered:  If any damage is caused to any 
person from any act done or acti on taken by any person under this 
Chapter, the damage sustaining pers on shall be entitl ed to recover a 
reasonable compensati on from the person who has done such act. 
286. Statute of limitation:  A person who is aggrieved from any act 
done or action taken under this Ch apter may make a lawsuit within 
six months after the date of know ledge of the commission of such 
act or action.
158 
 
Chapter-4 
Provisions Relating to Cultivatio n, Use and Registration of Land  
287. Prohibition of use of other's land:  No person shall cultivate or use, 
or cause to be cultivat ed or used, any land in which another person 
has right, possession a nd ownership, without co nsent of that person. 
288. Requirement to allow la nd to be used for ditch:  (1) If a person 
who needs to construct a ditch throug h other's land to cultivate land 
requests for land, the concerned ow ner of the land shall provide the 
land for the construction of the ditch through the place where the 
concerned landowner considers appropriate. 
(2) In consideration for the la nd provided for construction 
of a ditch through it pursuant to  sub-section (1),  the person who 
constructs the ditch shall prov ide a substitute land, amount 
according to the prevailing  price of the land used  in the construction 
of the ditch or reasonab le compensation to th e concerned landowner. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (2), 
if a ditch is constructed in a pub lic or government land, it is not 
required to provide a substitute land, price of land or compensation 
for the land used  in construction of the ditch. 
289. Prohibition of using whol e water of river or stream: No owner 
of a land shall so use the whole water of the river or stream which 
originates or flows from the la nd as to preven t the owner of 
downstream land from using the same or as to endanger the life of 
aquatic animals in the ri ver or stream or as to  adversely affect the 
ecological balance.
159 
 
290. Prohibition of making new ditch affecting irrigated field:  No 
person shall construct a new ditch above a land irrigated by a ditch 
already made and in operation in a manner to significantly lessen 
the volume of water in that land.  
291. Use and allocation of ditch water:  (1) A person who has spent 
labor or money in the construction  of a ditch shall have the first 
priority to the ditch water for the cultivation of land. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
in a place where peop le have been using the water according to 
agreed division between  them from the time i mmemorial, all people 
shall be entitled to us e the ditch water accord ing to the division. 
(3) If the water is sufficient for or no longer required for a 
person who uses the water pursua nt to sub-section (1), another 
person shall be entitled to use th e ditch water for cultivating the 
land irrespective of  the person whom th e ditch belongs to. 
(4) If the land of a person is irrigated and then water 
overflows to other’s land, such wa ter may be used even without the 
consent of the concerned land-owner,  and no claim sh all entertained 
for the same. 
292. Prohibition of alterati on in ditch without consent:  If any ditch is 
constructed only in the land of a person and other pe rsons have also 
been using the ditch, the owner of land where such ditch is situated 
shall not be allowed to alter the ditch without consent of the other 
persons using it. 
293. One who does not make labor or expenses in making ditch not 
allowed to use water:  (1) While making a new ditch or repairing
160 
 
an old ditch, all persons who use th e water of such ditch shall make 
necessary labor or expenses in pr oportion to their respective land. 
(2) A person who does not ma ke labor or expenses in 
making a new ditch or repairing an old one pursuant to sub-section 
(1) shall not be entitled to us e the water of such a ditch. 
294. Construction of ditch or us e of water with mutual consent: 
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if 
there is a separate agreement betw een the concerned land-owners or 
those who make a ditch or who are us ers of water in relation to the 
construction of ditch or using of water for the cultivation of land, 
the ditch may be made or water us ed according to that agreement.  
295. Cultivation of land adjacent to river bank:  If a river or stream 
enters in a land and divides it or cuts a land, the land shall belong to 
its owner and may be cultivated by the owner after the river or 
stream changes its course  and leaves the land. 
296. Prohibition of registration:  No person shall re gister, or cause to 
be registered, other’s land in his or her name. 
297. Transmission and registration a nd deregistration to be effected: 
(1) If a person needs to  have transfer of a la nd on the death of its 
registration holder or to have registration and deregistration of a 
land in which the person has got right in any manner, the concerned 
person shall submit an applicatio n to the Land Revenue Office and 
obtain transmission and registration and deregistration of the matter 
within thirty-five days of th e occurrence of such an event. 
(2) If a person submits an a pplication for transmission and 
registration and deregistration of the matter after the expiry of the
161 
 
time-limit referred to in sub-sec tion (1), the Land Revenue Office 
shall execute the transm ission and registration of such land in the 
applicant's name by collecting th e fee of one hundred rupees 
irrespective of the length of  time after such expiration. 
298. Statute of  limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act 
done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit 
within six months after the date  of knowledge of  commission of 
such an act or action.
162 
 
Chapter-5 
Provisions Relating to Govern ment, Public and Community 
Properties 
299. Property deemed to be government property:  The following 
property title to which belongs to, or which is owned, controlled by, 
or subject to, the Government of Nepal, Province Government and 
Local Government shall be deemed  to be the government property: 
(a) Government houses, buildings or lands, 
(b) Roads, paths or railways, 
(c) Forests, or trees or tr ees, bushes in forests, 
(d) Rivers, rivulets, streams,  lakes, ponds and banks 
thereof, 
(e) Canals, ditches or uncul tivated, barren lands, 
(f) Mines or minerals, 
(g) Himalaya, mountains, rocks, sandy lands, public 
gardens, 
(h) Any Property other than a public, community, trust 
property or any one's property. 
300. Property deemed to  be public property:  (1) The following 
property which is for public purpose shall be  d e e m e d  t o  b e  t h e  
public property: 
(a) Houses, lands, sewerage or roads having been used 
since ancient times, 
(b) Wells, water conduits, shor es, ponds and banks thereof,
163 
 
(c) Exits for chattels, pasture lands, Kharka, graveyards, 
Chihan, Samadhisthal, Kabristan and lands where 
these are located, 
(d) Inns, Pauwas, Dewals, religious meditation sites, 
memorials, temples, shrines, Chaitya, monasteries, 
Stupas, churches, Chowk, Dawali, Chautari or lands 
where these are located, 
(e) Lands where fairs, market s and public ente rtainment or 
sports sites are located, 
(f) Private property provided  by any person for public 
purposes, 
(g) Such other property as prescribed to be the public 
property by the Government of Nepal, by a notification 
in the Nepal Gazette. 
(2) The ownership of the public property shall vest in the 
public body or the G overnment of Nepal. 
301. Property deemed to be community property: Any land held by a 
community for its use, any structur e built in such land or other 
property owned by it shall be deem ed to be the co mmunity property.  
302. Details to be updated: (1) The Land Revenue Office shall prepare 
and update the following details in  relation to the government and 
public properties situated  within the district:  
(a) The location where the government or public 
properties are situated, plot  number and area, in the 
case of a land, and situation of the house, if any,
164 
 
(b) If the government or publi c properties are possessed by, 
or subjected to, any body or organization, details 
thereof, 
  (c) Other necessary details. 
(2) The Local Level shall re nder necessary assistance to 
the Land Revenue Office in preparing the detail s referred to in sub-
section (1).  
(3) After the preparation of the details pursuant to sub-
section (1), the Land Revenue O ffice shall forward a copy thereof 
to the concerned district  level administrative office and Local Level.
  
(4) The Local Level shall co llect and update the details 
referred to in sub-section (1 ) in relation to the community 
properties situated within  its jurisdiction and forward a copy thereof 
to the concerned La nd Revenue Office. 
303. Land ownership registrati on certificate to be provided:  (1) If 
any government land is held in th e name of a gove rnment body or 
public organization, the Land Reve nue Office shall prepare the land 
ownership registration certificate of such land in the name of such 
body or organization a nd provide it to such body or organization. 
(2) If any land is availabl e to a community in accordance 
with law, the Land Revenue Office shall prepare the land ownership 
registration certificate of such la nd in the name of such community 
and provide it to that community. 
304. Obligation to protect govern ment, public or community 
properties: (1) The Government of Nepal,  public organization or
165 
 
community holding the right in, po ssession, custody of, and control 
over, the government, public or co mmunity properties shall itself 
protect such properties.  
(2) To protect government an d public proper ties shall be 
responsibility of the concerned di strict level admi nistrative office 
and Local Level. 
(3) The concerned community and Local Level shall be 
responsible for the protection of the community property. 
305. Prohibition of registration of  government, public or community 
properties in individual's name:  (1) No person sh all register, or 
cause to be registered, any go vernment, public or community 
property in his or her name. 
(2) If a person registers, or causes to be registered, any 
government, public or community  property in the name of any 
individual, such registration shall, ipso facto, be void. 
(3) If a complaint is filed as  to the registration of any 
government, public or community pr operty in any individual's name, 
the concerned Land Revenue Offi ce shall summon the presence of 
the registration-holder also and inqui re into the matter, as required, 
and make necessary decision within  six months after the date of 
filing the complaint. 
(4) If the registration of any government, public or 
community property in any individu al's name is annulled pursuant 
to this Section, the Land Revenu e Officer shall make necessary 
entries in the records maintained  in his or her office and give
166 
 
information thereof to the concerned district level administrative 
office and Local Level. 
(5) The Land Revenue Office shall punish a person who 
registers, or causes to be regist ered, any government, public or 
community property in contravention of this Section with a fine of 
twenty-five thousand to on e hundred thousand rupees. 
(6) The registration of gove rnment, public or community 
property in oneself or some indi vidual's name which in itself is 
offence as per prevailing laws, noth ing written in this section shall 
be an obstacle to take actio n in offence related to it. 
306. Prohibition of possession or  cultivation of government, public 
or community land:  (1) No person shall possess any government, 
public or community land by way of overlapping, encroachment, 
surrounding or otherwise. 
(2) No person shall, except with the permission of the 
Government of Nepal, concerned public organization or community, 
cultivate, or cause to be cult ivated, any government, public or 
community land. 
(3) If any person possesses or cultivates any government, 
public or community land in contra vention of sub-sec tion (1) or (2), 
the concerned Land Revenue Office,  in the case of the government 
or public land, and the concerned Lo cal Level, in th e case of the 
community land, shall separate such  land, recover the crops yielded 
in the land from that pers on and vacate the land.  
(4) The Land Revenue Office ma y punish any person who 
possesses or cultivates any government, public or community land
167 
 
in contravention of this Section with a fine not exceeding ten 
thousand rupees. 
307. Prohibition of building structure:  (1) No person shall build any 
structure in any government, public or community land, for any 
personal or public purpose. 
Provided that any st ructure may be constr ucted as considered 
appropriate by the Government of Nepal, in the case of a 
government or public land, and by the concerned community for 
public purpose, in the case of a community land. 
(2) If any person initiate to construct any structure in any 
government, public or community land in contravention of sub-
section (1), the concerned Chief District Officer or Local Level 
shall stop such work immediately. 
(3) If any person has already constructed any structure in 
any government, public or communi ty land in contra vention of sub-
section (1), the concerned Chief Di strict Officer sh all give a time-
limit of fifteen days to the main  person having constructed the 
structure to demolish  such structure. 
(4) The main person having constructed such  a structure 
shall demolish the stru cture at his or her own expense within the 
time-limit given pursuant to sub-section (3). 
(5) If the main person having constructed such a structure 
fails to demolish the structure wi thin the time-limit given pursuant 
to sub-section (3), the concerne d Chief District Officer shall 
demolish such a structure.
168 
 
(6) If the Chief District Officer demolishes any structure 
pursuant to sub-section (5), the Chief District Officer may recover 
the expenses incurred in such demolition fr om the main person 
having constructed the structure an d punish him or her with a fine 
not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees. 
(7) It shall be the duty of the concerned police office to 
render necessary assistance, if an y, sought by the Local Level in 
stopping the construction of any structure or in demolishing any 
already built structure purs uant to this Section. 
308. Power to transfer government property: The Government of 
Nepal may transfer any governmen t property owned and possessed 
by, or subjected to, a ny body or organization to  any other body or 
organization, with the permissi on of such an owner body or 
organization. 
309. Conversion of commu nity property into public property:  (1) If 
any community holding a community  property does not use it or 
submits an application bearing signature or thumb impression of 
each of the main persons of a ll families of such a community, 
setting out that it is not necessary to use such community property 
in its purpose, to the concer ned Land Revenue Office, the 
concerned Land Revenue Officer ma y make necessary inquiry into 
the matter and convert such proper ty into the public property. 
(2) In the event of conversio n of any community property 
into the public property pursuant to  sub-section (1), the concerned 
Land Revenue Officer shall make n ecessary entries in the records 
maintained in his or her office a nd give information thereof to the 
concerned district level administ rative office and Local Level.
169 
 
310. To reward  complainant: (1) Any person whos oever may make a 
complaint with the concerned body on  the matters of registration, or 
causing registration, of a gove rnment, public or community 
property, or possession, use or cu ltivation of a land under such 
property or construction work done  in such land, in contravention 
of this Chapter. 
(2) If, on inquiring into a co mplaint made pursuant to sub-
section (1), the complaint is held to be true, the concerned body 
shall provide the complain ant with a reward in a sum that is half the 
fine imposed on the wrongdoer  pursuant to this Chapter. 
(3) The concerned body may k eep confidential  a complaint 
made pursuant to sub-section (1). 
311. Action to be taken: (1) If any employee, either knowingly or 
negligently or recklessly registers, or causes to be  registered, any 
government, public or community  property in the name of any 
person or if any employee with the duty to re nder assistance 
pursuant to this Chapter does no t render such assistance, such 
employee shall be liabl e to departmental ac tion in accordance with 
the law of terms and conditio ns of his or her service. 
  (2) Nothing shall prevent the taking of action against an 
employee who commits an act referre d to in sub-section (1) on a 
criminal offence, in addition to the action taken under sub-section 
(1).  
312. Governmental attorney empowe r e d  t o  f i l e  o r  m a k e  c a s e ,  
petition or appeal:  (1) The concerned gover nment attorney shall 
have power to file or make a cas e, petition or appeal against any
170 
 
decision made by any body or aut hority, adversely affecting any 
government or public property.  
(2) The concerned office or authority shall provide the 
government attorney with such documents and other assistance as 
may be necessary in relation to the filing or making of a case, 
petition or appeal pursu ant to sub-section (1). 
313. Statute of limitation: A person may make a lawsuit at any time in 
the cases of Sections 3 05, 306 and 307 of this Chapter, and a person 
who is aggrieved from any act done  or action taken referred to in 
other Sections of this Chapter may make a lawsuit within six 
months after the date on which su ch an act was done or action was 
taken.
171 
 
Chapter-6 
Provisions Relating to Trusts 
314. Trust deemed to  be established: If a person makes necessary 
arrangements for the operation and management by another of a 
property in which the person has right, ownership and possession 
for the benefit of beneficiary, a trust shall be deemed to be 
established. 
  Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter, the term 
"beneficiary" means a person, gro up, general public, body whether 
incorporated or unincorporated, or community getting the benefit 
from the trust property. 
315. Trust may be public or private:   (1)  A trust may be either public 
or private. 
(2) A trust established fo r the accomplishment of the 
following object shall be deem ed to be a public trust: 
(a) To establish, oper ate and use a fund for 
infrastructures of economic development or other 
development works, 
(b) To establish and operate  a fund necessary for the 
development of skills, creation of employment 
opportunities and development of the people with 
low income, 
(c) To operate social  welfare programs, 
(d) To establish and oper ate such educational and 
academic institutes like  schools, colleges and
172 
 
universities as may be useful for the general 
public, 
(e) To establish and operate clinics such as hospitals 
and health posts fo r public purposes, 
(f) To protect natural, hist orical or cultural heritages 
or to promote such act, 
(g) To operate programs for the protection of wildlife, 
aquatic animals or environment, 
(h) To operate programs for the protection of interest, 
welfare or upliftment of va rious classes, groups or 
communities, 
(i) To operate programs  relating to sports, 
(j) To carry out service-or iented welfare programs, 
(k) To operate rescue works, 
(l) To establish shrines, te mples, monasteries, domes, 
mosques, churches or carry out similar other 
religious activities, 
(m) To operate other public programs for the interest 
of public. 
(3) A trust which is establis hed with object to render 
benefit, advantage or f acility to any particular person or group shall 
be deemed to be a private trust. 
(4) If a trust is established to accomplish both public and 
private objectives, such a trust shall be deemed to be a public trust.
173 
 
316. Application to be made  for establishment of trust:  (1) A person 
who intends to establish a trust sh all make an application, setting 
out the following matters, to the Registrar: 
  (a) Value and details of the pr operty held for the trust, 
(b) Beneficiary, and benefit and facility to the beneficiary, 
the terms and limitation thereof, 
(c) If the trust is to be establ ished for any particular period, 
matter relating thereto, 
(d) Other necessary details. 
(2) In making an application pursuant to sub-section (1), 
the following documents shall also be submitted with the 
application: 
(a) Memorandum of incorporation of the trust, 
(b) Trustee's name and photocopy  of the deed relating to 
his or her consent, 
(c) Photocopy of the deed, if any, executed for the 
establishment of the trust, 
(d) Photocopy of a reliable deed relating to the trust 
settler's identity, and, in the case of the trust settler 
being a body corporate, certified copies of the 
documents relating to the incorporation of the body 
corporate and of th e decision by such a body corporate 
in relation to the esta blishment of trust, 
(e) Receipt of payment of the fees chargeable  by law for 
the registration of trust.
174 
 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter: 
(1) "Registrar" means the authority provided for by 
law for the registration, supervision and 
liquidation of trusts, and this term also includes 
the Land Revenue Officer in the concerned 
district if such authority is not so provided for. 
(2) "Trustee" means the person who is responsible 
for the operation and management of a trust 
property. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if any person has, by way of his or her oral  behavior, conduct or a 
testamentary gift or will, provided for the operation and 
management of a property in whic h he or she has right, ownership 
and possession as a trust, the trus t shall be deemed to have been 
established by such beha vior, conduct or will.  
Provided that in th e case of a property requiring registration 
for the transfer of its title in accordan ce with law, a deed pertaining 
to such transfer ha s to be registered. 
(4) If a foreign person intend s to establish a trust, the 
person shall make an application,  upon fulfilling the procedures as 
referred to in sub-sections (1) a nd (2). A foreign person may be the 
founder of the trust to be so established. 
Provided that a foreign person is not allowed to establish a 
trust for the accomplishmen t of the object referred to in clause (l) of 
sub-section (2) of Section 315.
175 
 
(5) At least one-thirds of the trustees of a trust established 
pursuant to sub-section (4) shall be Nepali citizens having 
permanent residence in Nepal. 
317. Details to be set out in  memorandum of incorporation:  The 
following matters shall be se t out in the memorandum of 
incorporation of a trust: 
(a) Names, surnames and addres ses of the founders of the 
trust, and, if a body corpor ate is the founder, names, 
surnames and addresses of th e directors of such body, 
(b) Objects and nature of the trust, 
(c) Names, surnames and addre sses of the trustees, details 
of the business to be perfor med by them, and, if a body 
corporate is a trustee, na me, surname and address of 
the person designated by the body to act  as the trustee, 
(d) Details of the beneficiaries, 
(e) Method of use of  the trust property, 
(f) Details of the tenure of the trustee, if any, so specified, 
(g) If the beneficiarie s are entitled to remuneration or other 
facilities, details thereof and limitation, 
(h) If the trust is intended to be established for a certain 
period, details of such period, 
(i) In the event of terminati on of the trust, consequences 
thereof, 
(j) Provisions relating to the operation, management and 
monitoring of the trust property,
176 
 
(k) Other necessary matters. 
318. Trust to be registered: (1) If an application is made for the 
establishment of a trust pursuant to  Section 316, the Registrar shall 
make necessary inquiry into the objects of the trust and the details 
of the property proposed for the establishment of the trust, and, if it 
appears reasonable to register the trust, register the trust and issue 
the trust registration certificate, with in a period of thirty-five days 
of the making of such application.  
(2) If a trust is registered purs uant to sub-section (1), the 
trust is deemed to have been established. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, a private trust may be ope rated even without registration. 
Provided that if a person so operates a private trust, the 
person shall give information th ereof to the concerned Registrar. 
319. Power to refuse registration of trust:  (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in Section 3 18, the Registrar may refuse to 
register a trust in any of  the following circumstances: 
(a) If the details, documents or  fees referred to in Section 
316 are not mentioned or paid, 
(b) If the name of the trust re sembles with the name of any 
other trust already registered prior to the registration of 
the trust applied for, 
(c) If the objects or terms of  the trust appear to be 
inappropriate or undesirabl e for reasons of public 
interest, decency, courtesy or public order, are not
177 
 
lawful or are not capable of being implemented owing 
to their uncertainty or vagueness. 
(2) If a trust is not capable of being registered pursuant to 
sub-section (1), the Reg istrar shall give info rmation thereof, along 
with the reason for refusal, to th e applicant within thirty-five days. 
(3) If, upon receipt of inform ation pursuant to sub-section 
(2), the applicant makes necessary  corrections and an application 
again for the registration of the trus t, the Registrar sh all register the 
trust and issue the regist ration certificate pursua nt to sub-section (1) 
of Section 318, within fifteen da ys of the making of such an 
application. 
320. Transfer of property for incorporation of trust:  (1) The trust 
founder shall transfer the property se ttled for the trust to the trustee 
within a period of three months of  the establishmen t of the trust.  
(2) If the property to be transf erred pursuant to sub-section 
(1) is an immovable property, such  a property shall be deemed to 
have been duly transfer red only when it is tr ansferred in accordance 
with law. 
(3) A foreign person that esta blishes a trust in Nepal shall 
remit into Nepal a movable propert y equivalent to at least one 
million United States Dollars thro ugh regular banking channel and 
hand over the same to the trustee within a pe riod of three months. 
(4) The information of the hand-over of the movable 
property pursuant to sub-section (3 ) shall be given to the Registrar. 
321. Dissolution of trust on failure of transfer of property:  In the 
event of failure to tr ansfer the property within the time-limit
178 
 
referred to in Section 320, the regi stration of such a trust shall be 
deemed to be void ipso facto  and the trust shall be deemed to have 
been dissolved. 
322. Operation and management of trust property according to 
memorandum of incorporation:  (1) The trustee shall, subject to 
the terms and restrictions set forth in the memorandum of 
incorporation, operate and manage the trust property. 
(2) Except as otherwise provid ed for in the memorandum 
of incorporation, the trustee shall, in operating and managing the 
property pursuant to sub-sectio n (1), not sell, mortgage, or 
otherwise transfer title to, the immovable property or any part 
thereof without prior permission  of the concerned Registrar. 
(3) In asking for prior permissi on of the Registrar pursuant 
to sub-section (2), the reason for th e sale, mortgage of, or transfer 
of title to, such property, and th e reasons and gro unds that it may 
result in more benefit to the beneficiary shall be set out. 
323. Duty to operate and ma nage trust property properly: (1) The 
trustee shall operate and manage the trust property properly, by 
exercising his or her capacity  and diligence honestly.  
(2) In the operation and mana gement of the trust property 
pursuant to sub-section (1), the trustee shall make arrangement to 
avoid any loss and damage to, and maintain sustainability of, such 
property. 
(3) Except as otherwise provid ed for in the memorandum 
of incorporation, in the operati on and management of the trust 
property pursuant to sub-sections (1) and (2), income earned from
179 
 
the trust property whic h is not required im mediately to accomplish 
the objects of trust ma y be invested for th e accomplishment of the 
objects of trust. 
(4) Except as otherwise provid ed for in the memorandum 
of incorporation, in making investme nt pursuant to sub-section (3), 
it may be invested as follows, in  the following proportion of the 
total sum: 
(a) At lest twenty-f ive percent in the pur chase of bonds or 
treasury bills issued by the Government of Nepal or 
Nepal Rastra Bank or bon ds guaranteed by the 
Government of Nepal, 
(b) Deposit of a maximum of twenty-five percent in a 
fixed account with a commercial bank, 
(c) Deposit of a maximum of ten percent in a fixed 
account with a development bank, 
(d) A maximum of five percent in the subscription of 
ordinary shares of a commercial bank, 
(e) Deposit of a maximum of ten percent in a fixed 
account with a finance company, 
(f) A maximum of five percent in the subscription of such 
ordinary shares of an enlisted public limited company 
as are dealt publicly.  
(5) The trustee shall, from time to time, carry out 
monitoring as to the investment ma de pursuant to sub-section (4), 
and if it appears from such m onitoring that the returns of 
investment made in one sector be lesser, such investment shall be
180 
 
withdrawn immediately and made in another sector yielding more 
returns, subject to the terms and restrictions of the investment.  
(6) In making monitoring or investment pursuant to sub-
section (5), opinion of an expert in the concerned sector may, as 
required, be obtained. 
(7) An opinion obtained purs uant to sub-s ection (6) may 
be taken as the basis for monitoring or investment. 
(8) The trustee shall maintain his or her personal property 
and the trust property separately and operate and mange the trust 
property accordingly, and in the event of a need to operate an 
account, separate accounts  shall be maintained. 
324. Trustee to be appointed:  (1) A trustee shall be appointed for the 
operation, management, protection and care of (herbichar)the trust 
property and for using fru its of such property to the benefit of the 
beneficiary or making proper arrangements thereof. 
(2) Except as otherwise provid ed for in the memorandum 
of incorporation, the f ounder of the trust shal l appoint the trustee. 
(3) In the event of the failur e to appoint or inability to 
appoint the trustee pursua nt to sub-section (1) or  (2), the founder of 
trust shall be deemed to be the trustee. 
325. Disqualification of trustee: The following person shall not be 
qualified to be a trustee:  
(a) A person who is not co mpetent to make contract, 
(b) A person who has embezzl ed a property in his or 
her custody,
181 
 
(c) A person who has been co nvicted by a court of the 
offense of corruption, 
(d) A person who has been sentenced for a criminal 
offense involving moral turpitude, 
(e) A person who is the sole  beneficiary of the trust 
property. 
326. Number of Trustees:  Except as otherwise provided for in the 
memorandum of incorporation, the number of trustees  shall, subject 
to the other provisions of this Chapter, be one in minimum and 
seven in maximum. 
327. Body corporate being eligible to be trustee:  (1) A body corporate 
which is established in accordance with law may be appointed as a 
trustee. 
(2) If the body corporate referred  to in sub-section (1) is 
appointed as a trustee, the person  working as the chief of such a 
body or a person to w hom the power is delega ted by a decision of 
the board of directors of such a body shall act  on behalf of such a 
body. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term 
"person working as the chief" m eans the chairper son, director, 
managing director, general manager,  executive dir ector of such 
body or a person empower ed by such a body to work as its chief. 
328. Provisions relating to vacancy in office of trustee:   (1) The office 
of the trustee shall be fallen vacant in an y of the following 
circumstances: 
(a) If the person is not qual ified to be a trustee,
182 
 
(b) If the person resigns from  the office of a trustee, 
(c) If the person dies or  becomes insolvent, 
(d) If, in the case of  a body corporate, it is dissolved, 
liquidated or becomes insolvent in accordance 
with law, 
 (e) If a trust is establis hed for a certain period and 
such a period is completed, 
(f) If the trustee is appointe d for a certain tenure and 
such a tenure is completed, 
(g) If the trustee is remove d by the trust founder or 
court on the gro und that he or sh e has embezzled 
the trust property or ha s not taken a reasonable 
care of (herchaha) such property. 
(2) If the office of a trustee is fallen vacant pursuant to 
sub-section (1), such an office shal l be filled in accordance with the 
procedures set forth in the me morandum of incorporation. 
(3) If the office of trustee cannot be fulfilled pursuant to 
sub-section (2), the beneficiary, if available, and the concerned 
Local Level, if there is no benefi ciary or the beneficiary cannot be 
identified, shall make an application, accompanied by a list of 
possible candidates, to the c oncerned District Court for the 
appointment of a trustee. 
(4) If an application is made for the appointment of trustee 
pursuant to sub-section (3), the Di strict Court shall appoint to the 
office of trustee an ap propriate person from th e list of candidates
183 
 
provided by the applican t, in consonance with the spirit of the 
memorandum of incorporation. 
(5) If any trustee is relieved of his or her office by virtue 
of the circumstance referred to in su b-section (1), he or she shall, as 
promptly as possible, hand over the trust property in his or her 
custody, control or use to other tr ustees, and he or she shall not get 
immunity from any kind of liability  or legal action for any act done 
or action taken by him or her whil e in office of a trustee by the 
reason only that he or she has been so relieved of office.  
Provided that if al l trustees are relieve d of office, such 
property shall be tr ansferred after the ap pointment of another 
trustee. 
(6) If the office of a trustee of  a public trust with only one 
trustee falls vacant or is fulfi lled pursuant to this Section, 
information thereof shall be  given to the registrar. 
329. To specify roll of  succession of trustee: (1) Except as otherwise 
provided for in as to the roll of succession of trustees in the 
memorandum of incorporation, afte r the death of a trustee, his or 
her eldest son, daughte r-in-law or daughter shall succeed the office 
of a trustee according to  the roll of succession,  and if there is no 
one out of them, his or her heir shall succeed the office of trustee.  
(2) If a person who becomes th e trustee pursuant to sub-
section (1) is not qualified to be th e trustee, his or her guardian or 
the person taking care of (herchaha) him or her shall perform the 
obligation of the trustee on his or  her behalf until such a person 
becomes qualified.
184 
 
(3) Except as otherwise provid ed for in the memorandum 
of incorporation, if th ere is a provision that  one's descendents are 
entitled to be the trustee, the de scendents of such a person shall 
succeed the office of trustee according to the limit of their 
respective rights, and th e provisions contained in Section 326 shall 
not apply to such case. 
330. Requirement to perform obli gation of trust ee in special 
circumstance: If there exists a situati on that the office of trustee 
falls vacant in entirety  and the office of tr ustee cannot be filled 
immediately pursuant to  sub-section (2) of S ection 328, the Local 
Level shall function as the trus tee until the office is filled. 
331. Requirement to opera te trust by consensus:  (1) Except as 
otherwise provided for in the me morandum of incorporation, the 
trust with more than one trustee shall be operated by consensus 
decision of all the trust ees as far as possible. 
(2) In the event of failure to reach c onsensus pursuant to 
sub-section (1), the trust may be operated by a majority decision of 
the then existing trust ees, and if that is not possible, by the decision 
of the eldest trustee. 
332. To carry out object of trust: The trustee shall car ry out the object 
of trust as set forth in the memora ndum of incorporation, and in so 
carrying out the object, the trus tee shall discharge functions 
honestly and according to his or her capacity and diligence.  
333. To maintain records of trust property: (1) The trustee shall 
prepare an inventory of the trus t property and update the records
185 
 
thereof, and, in the cas e of a public trust, a copy of such records 
shall be submitted to th e registrar each year.  
(2) The inventory referred to in sub-section (1) shall also 
reflect the total assets, loans, or if  such property has been invested 
in any business, principal, inte rest or other returns of such 
investment. 
334. Protection of trust property:  (1) The trustee shall protect and 
maintain the trust property, and ma y also make any kind of such 
legal action or complete any kind of  such formality with any public 
authority as may be required for this purpose. 
(2) In protecting or maintain ing the trust property, the 
trustee shall take prope r and reasonable care of (herbichar), and do 
act conducive to the enhancement of , the trustee prop erty as if the 
property were his or her own. 
335. Prohibition of possession of trust property to prejudice benefit 
of beneficiary:  No trustee shall so posse ss or use the trust property 
for himself or herself or  other person as may be prejudicial to the 
benefit of the beneficiary. 
336. Duty to prevent lo ss to trust property: (1)  It shall be the duty of 
the trustee to prevent destruction,  termination of, or otherwise loss 
to, the trust in a manner prejudicial to the benefit of the beneficiary 
or contrary to the object of the trust.  
(2) If the trust property is not managed properly or is made 
subject to cheating or fraud or is embezzled or used for other 
purposes, any trustee or beneficiar y may, subject to  the provisions
186 
 
set forth in the memorandum of in corporation, file a complaint in 
the court for the preventi on of such embezzlement. 
Provided that any one whosoeve r may file a complaint in the 
case of a public trust. 
(3) If, upon a complaint filed pur suant to sub-section (2), it 
is held that the trust property ha s not been managed properly or has 
been made subject to cheating or  fraud or embezzled or used for 
other purposes, the court shall r ecover the claimed amount from the 
embezzler and may also order compensation to be  paid by a trustee 
if the trustee has comm itted such embezzlement. 
337. To maintain accounts of trust: (1) The trustee shall maintain 
accounts in a manner to reflect cl early and actually the accounts of 
the trust property, and provide stat ements thereof available to the 
registrar, and trust founder or benefi ciary, identified, if any, intends 
to inspect the same.  
(2) In the case of a public trus t, the trustee shall have its 
accounts audited by a recognized  auditor each year and submit a 
copy of the audit repo rt to the registrar. 
338. Breach of trust:  (1) If a trustee fails to fu lfill the duties required to 
be fulfilled pursuant to this Chapte r, the trustee shall be deemed to 
have committed a breach of trust. 
(2) In the event of a breach of trust pur suant to sub-section 
(1), the trustee so br eaching trust shall be re sponsible for the loss 
and damage caused to the beneficiar y and bear liability for the same. 
(3) In bearing the liability purs uant to sub-section (2), the 
trustee breaching trust shall bear su ch profits as may be equal to the
187 
 
income or profits which the trust or  beneficiary would have made or 
earned if the trust ha d not been breached. 
(4) If a trust has more than on e trustee, all trustees who 
commit a breach of trust shall collectivel y bear the liabi lity for the 
loss and damage caused from  such breach of trust. 
(5) If, in relation to one port ion of any trust, the trust is 
breached, and, in relation to another portion of the trust, benefit is 
derived, the trustee shall not use su ch benefit in the fulfillment of 
his or her liability. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, the trustee shall not b ear the liability for the loss and 
damage caused from the breach of trust, in the following 
circumstance: 
  (a) If the loss and damage is caused by operation of law, 
(b) If the loss and damage is a result of the breach of trust 
by any act done by the pr evious trustee or the 
consequence thereof. 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, any one who does any of th e following acts in relation to a 
trust in operation upon  being incorporated in accordance with law 
in force for the time being prior to the commenceme nt of this Act 
shall be deemed to have co mmitted a breach of trust: 
(a)  Failing to do acts set forth in the Donative inscription, 
Shilapatra of the trust or deed es tablishing such trust, 
(b) Selling, disposing of, giftin g, donating or pledging or 
mortgaging the trust proper ty by the trust founder or
188 
 
his or her offspring or he ir, except for the residual 
property that can be poss essed and used after making 
operation as set forth in the deeds including the  
Donative inscription, Shilapatra of the trust, 
(c) Embezzling the movable trus t property by the trustee, 
except for reasonable wear and tear while using it for 
the trust purpose. 
(7) One who commits a breach of trust under sub-section 
(7) shall be liable to action in acco rdance with the law in force at 
the time of the commencement of this Act. 
339. Deed of trust property to remain with trustee: (1) Except as 
otherwise provided for in the me morandum of incorporation, the 
deeds, documents of the owners hip and possession of the trust 
property and other proof s and evidences pertaini ng thereto shall all 
be in the custody of the trustee, and in the case of a public trust, the 
trustee shall submit copies of such deeds and documents to the 
registrar. 
Provided that in th e case of any deed, doc ument or evidence 
to be approved by the registrar, it is not required to submit the 
copies of such deeds,  documents or eviden ce to the registrar. 
(2) The trustee and the regist rar shall safely retain the 
deeds, documents and ev idences referred to in sub-section (1). 
340. Entitlement to reimbur sement from trust property:  
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if 
the trustee has used his or her pers onal property or  other's property 
in the course of the protection of  the trust proper ty, accomplishment
189 
 
of the object of trust or protection of the benefit of the beneficiary, 
the trustee shall be entitled to  reimburse the amount for such 
property from the trust property. 
341. Other powers, duties and liabilit ies deemed to be vested with 
trustee: Except as otherwis e provided for in the memorandum of 
incorporation, in addition to the powers, duties and liabilities 
clearly set forth in this Chapter,  such other powers and duties as 
may be required for the implem entation and accomplishment of the 
object of trust, care (herbichar)and protection of the trust property 
and protection of the ri ghts and benefits of th e beneficiary shall be 
deemed to be vested  with the trustee. 
342. Acts not to be done by trustee: (1) Except as ot herwise provided 
for in the memorandum of incorporation, no trustee shall do, or 
cause to be done, any of the following acts:  
(a) To use the trust property in any manner other than in 
the accomplishment  of the object of trust, 
(b) To use, or caused to be used, the trust property in any 
act yielding profit to the trustee himself or herself or to 
anyone else, except in the accomplishment of the 
object of trust, 
(c) To delegate or hand over the responsibility or 
obligation of trustee to an other trustee or a person, 
  Provided that nothing shall bar the appointing of 
his or her agent or attorney in the course of ordinary 
transaction or assigning of any responsibility or 
obligation if such responsibili ty or obligation is to be
190 
 
assigned in view of the natu re of such transaction or 
assigning of any responsibility to another person with 
the consent of the benefici ary, if any, identified. 
(d) To carry out any act relating  to the trust solely contrary 
to Section 329, if there ar e more than one trustee, 
(e) To obtain any remunerati on, allowance or  facility in 
consideration for being a trustee, 
  Provided that nothing shall bar the receiving of 
reasonable remuneration, allo wance or facility for any 
work done whole-time or pa rt-time after establishing 
the office or with the prior pe rmission of the registrar, 
without prejudicing the object of the trust or benefit of 
the beneficiary. 
(f) To purchase or otherwise receive on pledge, mortgage, 
lease or rent the property of  the trust for which he or 
she is a trustee during his or  her tenure or before at 
least three years of his or her retirement from the 
office of a trustee. 
(2) The trustee shall not ma ke any economic transaction 
between his or her private property and the trust property. He or she 
shall make compensation for the lo ss, if any, to the trust property 
from such transaction. 
(3) The trustee shall not merge his or her property with the 
trust property. 
343. To give direction to  transfer tr ust property:  Except as otherwise 
provided for in the memorandum of  incorporation, in the case of
191 
 
only one beneficiary, after he or  she becomes comp etent to make 
contract, and in th e case of more than one be neficiary, after all of 
them become competen t to make contract and reach consensus, 
such beneficiary or beneficiaries ma y direct the trus tee to hand over 
the trust property to hi m or her or them, and if  any direction is so 
given, it shall be the duty of the tr ustee to abide by such direction. 
Provided that this provision sha ll not apply to the public trust. 
344. Power to relinquish be nefit of trust property: (1) In the case of a 
private trust, the beneficiary who is competent to make contract 
may, by a notice in writing to th e trustee and the registrar, 
relinquish any or all of his or her right, benefit,  facility or interest 
from the trust property.  
(2) If every beneficiary wholly  relinquishes the right, 
benefit, facility or in terest from the trust property pursuant to sub-
section (1), such a trust shall be deemed to have been dissolved. 
345. Duty to maintain ow nership of trust property:  (1) The trust 
property shall be entered as such in  the records of trust and held in 
the name of the person specified in the memorandum of 
incorporation and in the name of the beneficiary, if su ch a person is 
not specified in the memorandum of incorporation. 
(2) If, in the case of  a public trust, the memorandum of 
incorporation provides for the es tablishment of a separate body 
corporate for the operation and ma nagement of the trust property, 
such property shall be held in th e name of the body corporate so 
established.
192 
 
346. Alteration in the object of trust:  (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if the trust founder considers 
appropriate to make any amendmen t or alteration in the object set 
forth in the memorandum of in corporation at the time of the 
creation of trust, he or she may make an application, accompanied 
by the reason for such amendment or alteration , to the registrar. 
(2) If, on an inquiry into an application made pursuant to 
sub-section (1), the r eason for the amendment or alteration in the 
object set forth in the memorandum  of incorporation seems to be 
reasonable, the registrar may issue an order to amend or alter such 
object, and, if an order is so made, the object set forth in the 
memorandum of incorporation sh all be deemed to have been 
amended or altered accordingly. 
347. Trust property not to be counted:  Any trust property operated 
and managed by the trustee shall no t be counted as the property of 
the trustee for the purp ose of assessment of tax or for any other 
purpose. 
  Provided that in th e case of a person who derives any benefit, 
facility or interest from such pr operty, such benef it, facility or 
interest shall be counted. 
348. Consequence of  voidance of trust:  (1) If a trust on ce established is 
dissolved or voided fo r any reason, such dissolution or voidance 
shall not affect any act already done. 
(2) In the event of dissolution or voidance of a trust for 
any reason pursuant to sub-section (1 ), in the case of a public trust, 
except as otherwise pr ovided for in the memorandum of its
193 
 
incorporation, the trustee may, by order of the registrar, hand over 
the trust property to an y other trust with the id entical object or to 
any public body with similar objects if such other trust is not 
available, and in the cas e of a private trust, the trustee shall hand 
over the trust property to the benefi ciary, if identified, or to the 
nearest successor to th e beneficiary if the beneficiary is not 
available or to the tr ust founder if even such successor is not 
available or to other successor if  even the trust founder is not 
available. 
(3) If any body or person referr ed to in sub-section (2) is 
not available, the property of th e dissolved or voided trust shall 
devolve on the Gove rnment of Nepal. 
349. Appeal may be made:  A party who is not sa tisfied with any order 
or decision made by the regist rar pursuant to this Chapter may 
make an appeal to the concerned District Court within thirty-five 
days after the date of knowledg e of such order or decision. 
350. Not to affect other trust:  (1) Nothing contained in this Chapter 
shall affect any trust in operation upon be ing incorporated in 
accordance with law in force fo r the time being prior to the 
commencement of this Act, and su ch a trust may be operated in 
accordance with the D onative inscription  (Danpatra) , Shilapatra, 
memorandum of incorporation or other deed establishing such a 
trust or with the ritual , custom or practice. 
  Provided that such a trust shall be registered under this Act or 
information of its operation shall be given to the registrar within 
three years of the commencement of  this Act, and records thereof 
shall be maintained.
194 
 
  (2) The trust referred to in sub-section (1) shall be 
managed and operated as previously  for the object and purpose for 
which it was established, and the property or income that remains 
upon the accomplishmen t of that object and purpose may be 
possessed, used, pledged or mortgaged. 
  (3) The property of a trust established pursuant to sub-
section (1) may be purchased or so ld in a manner without prejudice 
the object and purp ose of the trust. 
  (4) The purchaser under s ub-section (3) shall use the 
property for the object and pu rpose for which the trust was 
established. 
  (5) If a trust under sub-sectio n (1) has been established or 
operated for any specifi c purpose by obtainin g a government land, 
such a land shall be used for the acco mplishment of the object and 
purpose for which the trust was established, and such a land shall 
not be used by the trustor or hi s or her offspring or successor. 
  (6) If the person referred to in sub-section (5) does not 
accomplish the object and purpose of such a trust, the person who 
accomplishes such object and purpos e shall be entitled to possess 
and use such a land. 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, if any person has continuo usly operated a tr ust referred to 
in sub-section (1) since last sixteen  years or more than sixteen years 
ago without any deed to that effect , that person may possess and use 
such property upon th e accomplishment of th e object and purpose 
of such a trust.
195 
 
(8) Matters other than those set forth in this Section shall 
be as set forth in the memorandum  of incorporation of a trust, 
Sheelapatra, Donative Inscription or as per the custom and practice 
in relation to the operati on of such a trust. 
351. Statute of limitation:  (1) There shall be no statute of limitation in 
relation to the following  matters if a person who is aggrieved from 
any act done or action taken pursuant  to this Chapter is to make a 
lawsuit: 
  (a) Embezzlement of the trust property, 
(b) Fraud or forgery of any do cument relating to the trust 
property, 
(c) Embezzlement or misappr opriation of the trust 
property, 
(d) Derivation of benefit by the trustee contrary to the 
terms of the memorandum of incorporation of the trust, 
(e) Restitution of the trust prop erty or its value or income 
from the trustee or other person. 
(2) A lawsuit may be made within six months after the 
date of the accrual of cause of ac tion in relation to  any matter other 
than that set forth in sub-section (1).
196 
 
Chapter-7 
Provisions Relating to Usufruct 
352. Usufruct deemed to be constituted: (1) When a person gives free 
a property in which he or she ha s title and ownership and fruits, 
benefit, income or facility to be  yielded from that property to 
another person entitling that other person to enjoy such property 
and fruits, benefit, income or faci lity thereof, us ufruct shall be 
deemed to be constituted.  
(2) The provisions of usufruct shall be as set forth in a 
contract entered into betw een the concerned persons. 
353. Usufruct to  be effective: The provision of usufruct constituted by a 
contract shall beco me effective on the date of the commencement of 
the contract unless otherwis e set forth in the contract.  
354. Deed to be executed:  (1) In giving an immovable property in 
usufruct, its owner shall execute a d eed to that effe ct in accordance 
with law. 
(2) In giving a property in co mmon in usufruct, consent of 
the coparceners living in a jo int family shall be obtained. 
355. Entitlement of usuf ructuary to enjoy propert y as if it belonged 
to him or her: (1) If a person gives an other person his or her 
property in usufruct, the usufructuary of su ch property shall be 
entitled to enjoy the property, fruits, benefit, income or facility to 
be yielded or earned from the proper ty and fruits, benefit, income or 
facility accrued from the property as if it  were his or her own 
property.
197 
 
(2) If there are more  than one usufruct uary obtaining a 
property pursuant to sub-section (1), every usufructuary shall be 
entitled to enjoy that property jointly or severally. 
(3) If a property obtained under the provision of usufruct is 
partitioned, every coparcener who is entitled to enjoy the property 
in usufruct shall be entitled to en joy the property pursuant to sub-
section (1). 
(4) A usufructuary may make a lawsuit in the court, as 
required, for the protection or en joyment of the property obtained 
under the provision of usufruct. 
356. Property which usuf ructuary cannot enjoy:  Notwithstanding 
anything contained in Section 355, a usufructuary shall not be 
entitled to enjoy the following prop erties relating to the property 
obtained under the pr ovision of usufruct: 
  (a) Mines and minerals related with the property, 
Provided that wh ere the mines are the subject of 
usufruct, the mines may be enjoyed. 
  (b) Grown trees. 
Provided that fruits, fl owers or other products 
obtained from the trees may be enjoyed. 
357. Prohibition of alteration in structure of property without 
consent: A usufructuary shall not be en titled to significantly alter 
the substance or form of the prop erty obtained und er the provision 
of usufruct or to destroy such property, except with the owner's 
prior permission.
198 
 
  Provided that if the enjoymen t of the property given under 
the provision of usufruct is not pos sible without an alteration in the 
form of or destruction of the prope rty, except as otherwise provided 
for in the contract, the property may be enjoyed by altering its form 
or destroying it, on pa yment of the price that may be set at the time 
of returning such property. 
358. Power to rent, lease or mo rtgage property under provision of 
usufruct: (1) The usufructuary may, if he or she so desires, rent, 
lease or mortgage the property obtained und er the provision of 
usufruct, by executing a deed, subject to the co ntract referred to in 
sub-section (2) of Section 352. 
  Provided that: 
(1) It is not required to execute a deed for renting a 
property for a monthly re nt not exceeding twenty 
thousand rupees.   
(2) If a property is so rented , leased or mortgaged, the 
usufructuary shall give in formation thereof to the 
owner. 
(3) The property obtained unde r the provision of usufruct 
may not be rented, leased or mortgaged for a period 
that exceeds the validity period of usufruct. 
(2) The usufructury shall, in renting, leasing or mortgaging 
the property obtained under the provision of usufruct, mention in 
the relevant deed that the property is under th e provision of usufruct.
199 
 
(3) If a rent, lease or mortgage  of the property obtained 
under the provision of usufruct is  executed in contravention of sub-
sections (1) and (2), su ch a transaction shall ipso facto be void. 
(4) A person who obtains a property on rent, lease or 
mortgage pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be entitled to enjoy the 
property as if the person  were the usufructuary. 
359. Duty to maintain (marmat samhar)  and care (herbichar) 
property under the provi sion of usufruct:  (1) The usufructuary 
shall maintain (marmat samhar)  and take care of (herbichar)  the 
property which he or she has ob tained under the provision of 
usufruct properly and reasonably as if it were his or her own 
property. 
(2) If a person obtains a prope rty under the provision of 
usufruct by way of re nt, lease or mortgage, the person shall take 
care of such property properly and reasonably. 
(3) The usufructuary shall ma intain the property obtained 
under the provision of usuf ruct at his or her cost. 
Provided that if it is necessary  to maintain such property by 
spending a substantial amount in consequence of a disaster, the 
usufructuary shall obtain the ow ner's prior permission, and the 
owner shall bear such maintenance expenses. 
360. Prohibition of causing damage  to property obtained under the 
provision of usufruct: (1) The usufructuary shall not damage, or 
cause to be damaged, the property  obtained under the provision of 
usufruct.
200 
 
(2) If such a property is da maged in any manner in the 
course of its enjoyment by the us ufructuary or by the person who 
has obtained it on rent, lease or mort gage pursuant to Section 358, 
the usufructuary shall be liable for it. 
Provided that the us ufructuary shall no t be liable for any 
damage or loss caused to such  property by a disaster. 
(3) The usufructuary may make  insurance or  take other 
necessary preventive m easures for the protec tion of the property 
obtained under the provi sion of usufruct agains t possible loss or 
damage in the course of its enjoym ent pursuant to sub-section (2). 
361. Usufructuary to bear tax or fee:   The usufructuary shall pay such 
tax or fee as may be leviable by  law in relation  to the property 
obtained under the prov ision of the usufruct. 
  Provided that the owner shall bear the wealth tax payable for  
the property obtained under th e provision of the usufruct. 
362. Information of cl aim or interference by an y one to be given to 
owner: (1) If any one makes encroachment, claim or interference 
on or with the property under the provision of usufruct, the 
usufructuary shall give informa tion thereof to the owner within 
fifteen days of su ch encroachment, cl aim or interference.  
(2) The usufructuary who do es not give information 
pursuant to sub-section (1) sha ll be liable to any consequence 
resulting therefrom. 
363. Validity period of the provision of usufruct:  (1) The provision of 
usufruct shall remain valid for th e period set forth in the contract.
201 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
the provision of usufruct shall not remain valid beyond the 
following period, except as otherwis e provided for in  the contract: 
(a) If the usufructuary is a na tural person, the death of the 
usufructuary or the expiration of a period of forty-nine 
years since the execu tion of the provision of usufruct, 
whichever occurs earlier, 
(b) If the usufructuary is a le gal person, the dissolution of 
the usufructuary or the expiration of a period of 
twenty-nine years since the execution of the provision 
of usufruct, whiche ver occurs earlier. 
  Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, 
the term "dissolution" in cludes the termination, 
liquidation, revocation of registration or insolvency of 
a legal person. 
(3) If there are more  than one usufructuary, the property in 
usufruct shall de volve on the owner in pr oportion to the death or 
dissolution of any usufructuary, ex cept as otherwise provided in the 
contract. 
364. Usufruct may be canceled: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in Section 363, if the usufructuary  damages or misuses the property 
obtained under the provision of us ufruct or does not enjoy it for the 
purpose for which it has been give n in usufruct or otherwise does 
any act that prejudices the right of  the owner in such property, the 
concerned owner may cancel the provi sion of usufruct at any time.
202 
 
(2) In the event of cancellation  of the provision of usufruct 
pursuant to sub-section (1), th e usufructuary shall return the 
property obtained  under the provision of usufruct. 
365. Power to return pr operty by usufructuary:  Notwithstanding 
anything contained in Sections 363 and 364, if the usufructuary 
does not wish to enjoy the property obtained under the provision of 
usufruct, the usufructuary may retu rn such a property to the owner 
at any time, by giving a notice of at least forty-five days. 
366. Usufruct deemed to  be extinguished:  (1) The provision of 
usufruct shall be deemed  to be extinguished in any of the following 
circumstances: 
(a) In the event of expiration  of the validity period of 
usufruct pursuant to Section 363, 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the 
term "expiration of the validity period" means: 
(1) If more than one natural person are usufructuary, 
the usufruct shall be deem ed to be terminated on 
the date on which the last  survivor usufructuary 
dies. 
(2) If more than one legal person are usufructuary, 
the usufruct shall be deem ed to be terminated on 
the date on which the last usufructuary legal 
person is dissolved. 
(b) In the event of return  of the property on the 
cancellation of usufruct pur suant to Section 364,
203 
 
(c) In the event of return of the property in usufruct by the 
usufructuary pursua nt to Section 365, 
(d) In the event, except for a reasonable reason, of the 
failure of the usufructuary  to enjoy the property in 
usufruct until six months after the date on which the 
provision of usufruct  became effective, 
(e) In the event of the acco mplishment of the special 
purpose for the accomplishmen t of which the provision 
of usufruct has been made, 
(f) In the event th at the property ob tained under the 
provision of usufruct is tran sferred to the usufructuary 
in accordance with law, 
(g) In the event of total loss of  the property obtained under 
the provision of usufruct. 
(2) In the event of the extinguishment of the provision of 
usufruct pursuant to sub-section (1), the property given to any 
person in usufruct shall ipso facto  devolve on the owner except in 
the circumstance set forth in  clause (f) or (g).  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) 
or (2), if a property is given in usufruct on the condition that it shall 
remain valid until any person attain s a certain age, the provision of 
usufruct shall remain valid unt il the date on which the person 
attains that age even if the person dies before the date of attainment 
of such age, as if he or she were surviving.  
367. Statute of  limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act 
done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit
204 
 
within six months after the date of  knowledge of the commission of 
such an act or action.
205 
 
Chapter-8 
Provisions Relating  to Servitudes 
368. Servitude to be deemed:  (1) If there is  a provision of enjoyment or 
use by the owner of another propert y of any immovable property or 
any part thereof in which anothe r person has right, ownership or 
possession pursuant to this Chapter,  provision of servitude shall be 
deemed to have been created. 
(2) A servitude shall be in ex istence in accordance with the 
contract, nature of the place where the immovable property is 
situated, custom or pr actice exercised since an cient time therein. 
369. Use of provision of servitude to be allowed:  (1) If there is a 
provision of servitude pursuant to  Section 368, the owner of the 
concerned immovable property shall allow another person to enjoy 
or use the immovable pr operty in accordance w ith the provision of 
servitude. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if there is a provision of servit ude for public purpose, such a 
servitude may also be used  for personal purpose. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, a servitude cr eated by operation of law may be used in 
accordance with law. 
370. Servitude not to be adversely affected by transfer of immovable 
property: (1) A servitude in a servie nt immovable property shall 
continue to exist even if the ow ner of such a immovable property 
transfers all or any of such property to another person in any 
manner.
206 
 
(2) Even if the servient  immovable property is partitioned, 
each coparcener shall be deemed to have provid ed such a servitude.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) 
or (2), if in transferring or pa rtitioning the servient immovable 
property, there is a provision of  servitude elsewhere in such 
property and servitude is  not thus required to  be provided in the 
immovable property in which a person acquires right by way of 
such transfer or partition, the se rvitude shall be deemed to have 
been extinguished to that extent. 
371. To allow enjoyment or use:  (1) If any land, despite that a person 
has right, ownership or possession  in it, has been in use since 
ancient time as a public or communi ty road, cattle ex it, pasture land, 
ditch, cannel, quay, pond, public ro ad, sewage, track road or main 
road, public shelter, tomb, graveyard, shrine, temple, monastery, 
dome, mosque, Idgaha, Karbala, Kabristan  or church, community 
school, hospital or similar other pu blic monument or site, the land 
shall be allowed to be used by  the concerned pe rsons accordingly 
for the particular purpose. 
(2) The owner or possessor of  the servient land shall not 
cultivate or use, make any structur e in, or otherwise own or possess, 
it in such manner as to adversely affect the provision set forth in 
sub-section (1). 
372. Use of neighbor's house or land at time of disaster:  If, at the time 
of disaster such as fi re, earthquake, volcano and flood, it is not 
possible to rescue victims of such disaster without entering or using 
the house or land of a person, the victims may be rescued, or caused 
to be rescued, by entering the h ouse or land with the consent of the
207 
 
owner of the house or land if th e owner is available, and even 
without consent of the owner of th e house or land if the owner is 
not available for the time being or refuses to give consent. 
  Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "the 
owner of the house or land" me ans the person who is using, 
possessing or controlling the conc erned house or land for the time 
being. 
373. Acquisition of servitude of passage:  (1) If the passage originally 
available to have access to and fr om a house or land is destroyed 
subsequently due to a disaster, the person who has been using the 
passage to and from such house or land from the past shall have the 
servitude of a reasonable pa ssage to the public road. 
(2) A person shall not be enti tled to demand the servitude 
of passage from the owners of all surrounding houses or land 
pursuant to sub-section (1), an d he or she may demand such a 
servitude from the owner of the house or land through which the 
distance to the public road is the shortest. 
374. Prohibition of transfer of ho use or land without provision of 
passage or exit: (1) In setting aside and tran sferring any part of the 
house or land with the provision of passage or  exit, such a house or 
land shall not be transferred wit hout making provision of passage or 
exit to both the purch aser and the seller. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if there is anothe r passage or exit to and fr om such house or land, it 
is not required to make pr ovision of passage or exit.
208 
 
375. Power to extend basic services:  If it is not poss ible to provide 
basic services such as sewerage, water supply, electricity, gas and 
telephone service to the house of  a person through his or her own 
land or public, governm ent or community land, the person shall be 
entitled to lay pipe or line in th e neighbor's land in  such manner as 
not to cause any loss or damage  to the owner of such land. 
376. Power to use river or st ream or river or stream bank:  Any 
person may carry out movement, na vigation, boating or fishing in 
the river or stream which is situ ated in, or orig inated from, the 
personal property of any person or within the zone of a maximum 
of four meters in either si de of such river or stream. 
  Provided that such activity is not allowed in small rivulets 
that do not have perenn ial flow of water.  
377. Power to use exit road: (1) If a river or stream is diverted or a 
reservoir is built or a dam is made for any reason in the river or 
stream, the owner of th e concerned land shall provide a reasonable 
exit for the public and livestock to have access to and from such 
diversion, reservoir or dam.  
(2) If, in maintaini ng the provision of exit passage referred 
to in sub-section (1), it is possi ble to maintain such exit passage 
through the land of more than one  person, the exit passage shall, 
unless provided otherwise, be ma intained through th e nearest land 
that is technically feas ible for the access to th e diversion, reservoir 
or dam though that passage.
209 
 
378. Prohibition of preventing natural flow of water:  (1) Every house 
or land owner shall himself or hers elf manage the rain water flow 
from his or her house or land. 
(2) If there is no provision refe rred to in sub-section (1), 
the rain water shall be allowe d to make its natural course. 
Provided that no water shall be  let to so flow as to cause 
adverse effect on the downst ream land by making a ditch, 
controlling floods or otherwise di verting the flow or through human 
intervention. 
379. Power to use stream, river or pond water:  Any person may use 
the water of a stream, river or pond,  which is originated from, flows 
through or situated in, the land of another pers on for the purpose of 
irrigation and drinking, after the use of such water by the concerned 
owner. 
  Provided that in ma king such use, the adjoining neighbor 
shall have priority. 
380. Requirement to allow passage  or exit for farming: (1)  If a person 
does not have a passage or exit fo r people or livestock to have 
access to and from his or  her farm land  and needs such passage or 
exit, the owner of the concerned la nd shall provide the facility of 
passage or exit to  such a person. 
Provided that no person shall be compelled to provide such a 
passage or exit through the house and compound land.  
(2) A person who uses the passa ge or exit pursuant to sub-
section (1) shall so use it that no loss or da mage is caused to the
210 
 
crops or other property of the pers on providing such a passage or 
exit. 
381. Compensation to be paid: If, in using a house or land belonging to 
another person, any kind of loss or damage is caused to any one for 
the purposes set forth in Sections 372, 373, 375, 377 and 380, the 
person using the passage or exit shall pay a reasonable 
compensation to the concerned house or landowner.  
382. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggr ieved from any act 
done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit 
within six months after the date of knowledge of such an act or 
action.
211 
 
Chapter-9 
Provisions Relating  to House Rent 
383. House deemed to be rented:  If a person who ha s right, possession 
or ownership in a house lends, for a rent, the h ouse to another 
person to use it for a certain period of time, the person shall be 
deemed to rent the house.  
  Explanation:  For the purposes of th is Chapter, the term 
"house" means any house, storey, unit or room of the house, or land 
or cartilage occupied  by such a house. 
384. Prohibition of ren ting unsafe house: (1) No person shall rent or 
take on rent a house which is no t safe for human habitation from 
health and securi ty perspectives. 
(2) The quality standards of a house for n on-residential 
purpose such as a ware house, livestock farming, storage and cold 
storage shall be as specified in the house rent agreement. 
385. Period of house rent:  (1) The period of hous e rent shall be as set 
forth in the agreement, no t exceeding five years. 
  Provided that if a house is re nted for a commercial purpose, it 
shall be as set fort h in the agreement. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
after the expiration of  the period of house re nt, the period may be 
extended at times wi th the consent of th e house owner and the 
tenant.
212 
 
386. Agreement to be co ncluded while renting:  (1) While renting a 
house, its owner shall enter into an agreement in writing with the 
tenant, setting out th e following matters: 
(a) Full name and address of the owner and of the 
tenant, their citizenship number, and passport or 
identification certificate, in  the case of a foreigner, 
(b) Place and plot number of  the land where the house 
is located, 
(c) Purpose for rent, 
(d) Date of commencement of rent, 
(e) Validity period of rent, 
(f) Monthly rent, 
(g) Time and mode of payment of rent, 
(h) Liability to pay tariffs of electricity, water supply, 
telephone etc. used in the house, 
(i) Matter on payment of house rent tax, 
(j) If the rented house is to be insured, matter relating 
thereto, 
(k) Matter on leaving the re nted house and eviction of 
the tenant from it, 
(l) Matter as to whether the rented house can be 
sublet to another, and 
(m) Other necessary matters.
213 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
it is not necessary to enter into an agreement in writing with the 
tenant if the monthly house rent does not exceed tw enty thousand 
rupees. 
(3) The tenant's photograph sh all also be affixed to the 
agreement referred to in sub-section (1). 
(4) The agreement referred to in sub-section (1) shall also 
be signed by at least two witnesse s of each side, namely the house 
owner and the tenant, and a copy th ereof shall be retained each by 
the owner and the tenant. 
(5) After the completion of th e procedures re ferred to in 
sub-section (4), an ag reement shall be deemed  to be entered into 
between the house ow ner and the tenant. 
387. Details of house to be provided:  In renting a house, the owner 
shall, at the time of entering into  agreement, disclose the weakness 
or fault, if any, in the struct ure of the house to the tenant. 
388. Preparation of descriptio n of goods or chattels: (1) The house-
owner shall, prior to renting his or  her house, prepare a description 
of the goods or ch attels in the house to be rented.  
(2) If the tenant is to use the goods or chattels set forth in 
the description prepared pursuant to  sub-section (1), he or she shall 
receive such goods or chattels and give a r eceipt thereo f to the 
house-owner. 
389. Obligations of house owner:  The obligations of the house-owner 
shall be as follows:
214 
 
(a) To allow the tenant to us e the house in accordance with 
the agreement, 
(b) To arrange for such wa ter and electricity supply, 
sewerage and sanitation in th e rented house as may be 
required, except as otherwise provided for in the 
agreement, 
(c) To prevent the tenant from  insecurity, harassment or 
unrest from other persons dwelling in the house, 
(d) To abide by the other matters  set forth in the agreement. 
390. Obligations of tenant:  The obligations of the tenant shall be as 
follows: 
(a) To pay the rent to the ho use owner within  the specified 
period, 
(b) To maintain sanita tion in, take care of (herchaha), 
protect and safeguard the re nted house properly and 
reasonably, as if it were his or her own, 
(c) Not to do any act such as causing unrest, harassment or 
insecurity to the other dw ellers in the house or 
neighbors, 
(d) To abide by the other matters  set forth in the agreement. 
391. Mode and procedu re of payment of rent: (1) The tenant shall pay 
the rent to the house owner in  accordance with the mode and 
procedure set forth in the agreement.  
(2) If the agreement does no t provide for any mode and 
procedure of the payment of rent pursuant to sub-section (1), the
215 
 
tenant shall pay the rent to the house owner within seven days of 
the expiry of each month. 
(3) The rent may be paid by way of cheque or cash 
pursuant to sub-section (2). 
(4) If the owner receives the rent  in cash pursuant to this 
Section, he or she shall give a receipt thereof to the tenant. 
392. Obligation to pa y tax and other charge: (1) Except as otherwise 
set forth in the agreement, it shal l be the obligation of the house 
owner to pay the tax and other charge  leviable by law in relation to 
the house rented.  
(2) If it is the obligation of the land owner to pay tax or 
charge pursuant to sub-section (1 ) and the house owner fails to pay 
the tax or charge in time, the te nant may pay such tax or charge. 
(3) If the tenant pays the tax or charge pursuant to sub-
section (2), he or she shall be entitled to deduct such an amount 
from the rent payable to the house owner. 
393. Insurance of ho use to be procured:  (1) A tenant who rents a 
house for industrial or  business purpose shall procure the insurance 
of the house for its security. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term 
"industrial or business purpos e" means the operation of any 
industry or carryin g on a business or trade by  having a departmental 
store or one or mo re than one shop. 
(2) If the person obliged to pr ocure insurance pursuant to 
sub-section (1) fails to procure in surance of the house and the house
216 
 
is damaged by such cause  as disaster, unrest, ri ot or fire, the tenant 
shall be liable for such damage. 
394. Repair and mainte nance of house rented: (1) Except as otherwise 
set forth in the agreement, the tena nt shall be obliged to repair and 
maintain the rented house, as required.  
(2) If the agreement provides  that the house owner is 
obliged to repair and maintain the rented house and it is necessary 
to carry out any repair and mainte nance of the house, the tenant 
shall give a notice in writing to the house owner in time. 
(3) If the land-owner fails to repair and maintain the rented 
house despite the notice given purs uant to sub-section (2), the 
tenant may repair and maintain such a house. 
(4) The tenant shall be entitled  to deduct the billed amount 
of expenses incurred in the repa ir and maintenance of the house 
carried out pursuant to sub-section (3) from the rent payable to the 
house owner. 
(5) Except as otherwise agr eed upon between the house 
owner and the tenant in respect of the repair and maintenance of the 
house, the tenant shall, prior to carrying out repair and maintenance 
under sub-section (4), prepare a cost estimate of the repair and 
maintenance and give its written in formation to the house owner in 
advance of fifteen days. 
395. Subletting house rented to other person:  (1) If the agreement 
entered into with the house owne r provides that the tenant may 
sublet the whole or any portion of the house rented by him or her to
217 
 
another person, the tenant may, subj ect to the agreem ent, sublet the 
whole or any porti on of such a house to another person. 
(2) If the tenant sublets the whole or any po rtion of the 
house rented to another person pursuant to sub-s ection (1), the 
tenant shall, no later than fifteen  days, give information in writing 
indicating the name and address of  the sub-tenant  to the house-
owner. 
(3) A sub-tenant who rents the house pursuant to sub-
section (1) shall pay the rent of the house or its portion  to the tenant 
who has so sublet. 
(4) The sub-tenant who rents the house pursuant to sub-
section (1) shall, while dwelling in the rented house, abide by all 
such terms and provisions as requ ired to be abided by the tenant 
pursuant to this Chapter. 
(5) If the sub-tenant who rent s the house pursuant to sub-
section (1) fails to ac t in accordance with the terms while dwelling 
in the rented ho use or fails to maintain sanitation in, protect or 
safeguard, the house or carries  out any act such as causing 
harassment, pain or unrest to th e other dwellers of the house or 
neighbors, the tenant may evict th e sub-tenant fro m the house at 
any time. 
396. Prohibition of altering  structure without consent:  (1)  Except as 
otherwise provided in the agreement, the tenant shall not demolish, 
remove or disorder any structure of, or add any structure to, the 
rented house or otherwise alter it without the house owner's consent 
in writing.
218 
 
(2) If the tenant does any act in contravention of sub-
section (1) and thereb y causes any loss to the house-owner, the 
house-owner shall be entitled to  recover compensation for the loss 
caused to him or her from the tenant. 
397.  Prohibition of using house contrary  to agreement:  The tenant 
shall not use the house for any purpos e other than that for which he 
or she has rented it, without pr ior consent of the house-owner. 
398. Alteration in agreement:  The house owner and the tenant may, 
with mutual consent, make necessa ry alteration in the house rent 
agreement. 
  Provided that if such  an agreement is regi stered pursuant to 
this Act, alteration shall be ma de upon making application to the 
concerned body. 
399. Power to inspect:  (1) The house-owner may, by an advance notice 
to the tenant, inspect the rent ed house from time to time. 
(2) If the house-owner intends to inspect the rented house 
pursuant to sub-section (1), it sh all be the duty of the tenant to 
allow the house-owner to  inspect the house. 
400. Leaving rented house:  (1) A tenant may l eave the rented house 
prior to the expiration of the period  of rent in any of the following 
circumstances: 
(a) If the house owner fail s to perform his or her 
obligations pursuant to Section 389, 
(b) If the tenant no longer ne eds the house for the purpose 
for which he or she rented it,
219 
 
(c) If the house owner does any act in contravention of the 
agreement or this Chapter. 
(2) If the tenant is to leave the house in th e circumstance 
referred to in clause (b) of sub- section (1), exce pt as otherwise 
provided in the agreemen t, the tenant shall give a notice in writing 
to the house-owner in advance of at least thirty-five days. 
(3) If the tenant leaves the house without giving a notice 
pursuant to sub-section (2), the house-owner shall be entitled to 
deduct the rent for that period from the rent, if any, paid in advance 
by the tenant and to recover the sa me from the tenant, failing such 
advance payment. 
401. Power to evict tenant:   (1) The house -owner may evict the tenant 
from the house in any of the following circumstances: 
(a) If the tenant fails to pe rform his or he r obligations 
pursuant to Section 390, 
(b) If the tenant commits in the rented house any offense 
related activity prohibited by law, 
(c) If the house-owner needs the house for himself or 
herself, 
(d) If it is necessary to repa ir and maintain the house by 
removing inhabitants from the house, 
(e) If the rented house does no t appear to be appropriate 
for human habitation from the technical and health 
perspectives, 
(f) If the period of house rent expires,
220 
 
(g) If the tenant does any act  in contravention of the 
agreement or this Chapter, 
(h) If there exists the circum stance under sub-section (5) 
of Section 395. 
(2) If it is necessary to evic t the tenant from  the house in 
the circumstance referred to in clau se (c) of sub-section (1), the 
land-owner shall give a notice in writing to the tenant in advance of 
at least thirty-five days. 
(3) If the house owner evicts the tenant from the house 
pursuant to sub-section (2), the house-owner is not entitled to rent 
such a house to another person un til three months, without using it 
on his or her own. 
(4) If the house-owner is to rent such house to another 
person within three months purs uant to sub-sect ion (3) and the 
previous tenant intends to rent su ch a house, he or she shall get 
priority. 
402. House rent agreement d eemed to be terminated:  A house rent 
agreement entered into pursuant to Section 386 shall be deemed to 
have been terminated in any of  the following circumstances: 
  (a) If the tenant leaves the house, 
  (b) If the house-owner evicts  the tenant from the house, 
(c) If the house-owner and the tenant cancel the agreement 
with mutual consent, 
(d) If the period of house rent expires.
221 
 
403. Duty to hand over goods or  chattels in good condition: (1) The 
tenant shall, while leaving the re nted house, count the goods or 
chattels in his or her custody, clean or color the house, if required, 
and hand over the same in go od condition to the house-owner.  
(2) If the tenant looses or damages any goods or chattel in 
his or her custody, the tenant shall hand over si milar goods or 
chattel or pay a sum of money as per the prevailing  price of such 
goods or chattel to  the house-owner. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (2), 
the tenant shall not be bound to reimburse for any goods or chattel 
which is depreciable or destroyable in the course of daily use or to 
pay price for such goods or chattel. 
404. Power to vacate house:  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
elsewhere in this Chapte r, if a tenant disapp ears without paying the 
rent for three months or more wi thout notice and th e tenant is not 
found despite a public notice or correspondence with his or her 
address or the tenant  or his or her succe ssor or agent does not 
appear despite that he or she has been found,  the house-owner shall 
submit an application with such statement to the concerned ward 
office of the Local Level. 
  (2) If an application is subm itted pursuant to sub-section 
(1), the concerned ward office sh all make a public notice inviting 
the tenant to appear within  a period of fifteen days. 
  (3) If a notice is published pu rsuant to sub-section (2), the 
tenant shall appear wi thin such a period.
222 
 
  (4) If such a person does not appear within the period 
referred to in sub-section (3), the concerned ward office may open 
and vacate the rented house, upon ha ving the goods th erein in its or 
any one's custody. 
  (5) If the person who ha s disappeared pursuant to sub-
section (3) returns or sends his or her agent within six months, the 
concerned ward office shall collect the due rent from , and return the 
goods to him or her. 
  (6) Notwithstanding anything  contained elsewhere in this 
Section, if the concerned ward office of the Local Level does not 
take any action even within one month of the application submitted 
to it, the concerned house-owner shall submit an application to the 
concerned ward office and the near by police office, and execute a 
deed and open the house in witn ess of a police employee and at 
least two local persons, and hand over the custody of the tenant's 
goods to the police. 
405. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggr ieved from any act 
done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit 
within six months after the date on  which such an act was done or 
action was taken.
223 
 
Chapter-10 
Provisions Relating to  Donation and Gift 
406. Donation or gift deemed to be effected: (1) If a person grants free 
of cost a property in which the person has right and ownership to 
another person or for any religi ous, social, public or community 
purpose such an act shall be  deemed to be a donation.  
(2) If a person grants free of cost a property in which the 
person has right and ownership to another person as a reward, prize 
or tip in consideration for merits to  him or her by that other person 
by way of fostering him or her or otherwise or  for family love or 
affection such an act shall be deemed to be a gift. 
(3) In effecting a donation or gift pursuant to sub-section 
(1) or (2), such a donation or gi ft may be so effected that it is 
effective immediately or after a certain period or after the death of 
its maker. 
(4) If a donation or a gift becomes effective only after the 
death of the maker of su ch donation or gift, it shall be deemed that 
he or she has executed a testamenta ry donation or testamentary gift. 
407. Property may be donated by  pronouncement: A person may 
donate a certain amount or proper ty for any speci fic purpose by 
making pronouncement in writing or  publicly in a public function 
organized for that purpose. 
  Provided that no lawsuit may be made if the person does not 
transfer the property so donated by him or her.
224 
 
408. Voidance of donation or gift:  Any donation or gift made pursuant 
to this Chapter shall ipso facto be void in any of the following 
circumstances: 
(a)  If the person entitling to donation or gift does not 
accept the donated or gifted property himsel f or herself 
or through his or her agent, 
(b) If a property is donated or  gifted to a person with 
entitlement after testament an d the receiver of donation 
or gift dies before the pe rson making such a donation 
or gift or the organization ob taining donation or gift is 
dissolved, 
(c) If a property is donated or  gifted to an unborn baby and 
the baby is not born alive, 
(d) If the donated or gifted prop erty is so destroyed that its 
existence is extinct before the donation or gift becomes 
effective. 
409. Donation or gift to be voidable :(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained elsewhere in th is Act, a donation or gift may be voided in 
any of the following circumstances: 
(a) If a person donates or gift s a property in which another 
has right and ownership, 
(b) If any property is donate d or gifted without obtaining 
the consent of another pers on where such consent is 
needed pursuant to law, 
(c) If the maker of the donation  or gift is an incompetent 
or quasi-competent person,
225 
 
(d) If the donation or gift is made without fulfilling the 
legal requirements. 
(2) In the case of a donation or gift made without the 
consent of another pers on pursuant to clause (b) of sub-section (1) 
where such consent is required, the property shall be void to the 
extent of such consent not taken. 
410. Power to amend or revoke deed of gift with testament: (1) The 
maker of gift with testament may, if he or she so wishes, amend the 
terms of, or revoke, the deed of gi ft with testament executed by him 
or her at any time, by making an application in person before the 
concerned authority. 
  (2) In amending or revoking  the deed of gift with 
testament pursuant to sub-section (1), such a pers on shall appear 
before the concerned authority, ex ecute a separate deed and then 
amend or revoke such a deed  of gift with testament. 
  (3) The deed revoking or am ending the deed of gift with 
testament pursuant to sub-sect ion (2) shall be executed in 
fulfillment of the proced ures applicable to the execution of the deed 
of gift with testament. 
  (4) No person may grant a property once granted to any 
one by executing the deed  of gift with testament to other person by 
executing such a d eed, without revoking the earlier deed of gift 
with testament pursuant to this Section. 
  (5) If a deed of gift w ith testament is executed in 
contravention of sub-section (4), the deed of gift  with testament 
executed earlier shall ip so facto be valid.
226 
 
411. Not to obtain pr operty under deed of gift with testament: If the 
receiver of gift with testament is convicted to have committed any 
criminal offense against the maker of such a gift  before the deed of 
gift with testament b ecomes effective, the receiver shall not be 
entitled to obtain the prop erty under such a deed. 
412. Statute of limitation: A lawsuit may be made within the statute of 
limitation, if any, specified separate ly in this Chapter, within two 
years after the date of maturation of  one's right in donation or gift 
received by one and af ter the date of poss ession and enjoyment 
upon maturity of right in a donation or gift in capable of being made, 
and, in relation to the other cases, within one y ear after the date of 
knowledge of any act done or actio n taken pursuant to this Chapter, 
by a person who is aggrieved fr om such an act or action.
227 
 
Chapter-11 
Provisions Relating to Transfer and Acquisition of Property 
413. Property deemed to be transferred : If a person sells, donates, 
gifts or otherwise transfers a proper ty in which he or she has right 
and ownership to anothe r person, the property shall be deemed to 
have been transferred to that other person. 
414. Property m ay be transferred: (1) Any person, other than a person 
who is not competent to make contract pursuant to this Act or laws 
in force, may, subject to this Act, transfer a property in which he or 
she has right and ownership to one or more than one person jointly 
or severally.  
(2) The competency or incompetency re ferred to in sub-
section (1) shall be determined on  the basis of whether he or she 
was competent or incompet ent at the time of the transfer of property 
by him or her. 
(3) A person may, pursuant to sub-section (1), transfer a 
property in which he or she has right and ownership to another 
person with immediate or  testamentary effect.  
(4) In transferring a property pursuant to this Section, a 
deed shall be executed in fulfi llment of the legal requirements. 
  Provided that: 
(1) It is not required to execute  a deed to dona te or gift any 
movable property or cash  amounting up to one hundred 
thousand rupees.
228 
 
(2) Sale or otherwise transfer  of a movable property shall 
be made in accordance with  the laws in force. 
415. Power of guardian or  curator to sell property:  (1) A guardian or 
curator may, subject to this Act, sell and transfer a property for the 
rights, interests and protection of  the person und er his or her 
guardianship or curatorship. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
except as otherwise prov ided in this Act, no immovable property 
may be sold without permission of the court. 
416. Ownership devolving on transferee of property: (1) If any 
person transfers his or her propert y to another person pursuant to 
Section 414, his or he r ownership in that property shall cease to 
exist from the date of such transf er and the transf eree shall have 
ownership in such property.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if a person transfers the right in hi s or her property to be effective 
with testament, the tr ansferee shall have owne rship in such property 
only after the death of the transferor. 
(3) If two or more persons ac quire the same property, they 
shall have that much entitlement to  such property in  proportion to 
their respective portion. 
(4) If a deed does not indicat e the portion to which a 
person is entitled on the acquisiti on of a property, all the persons 
acquiring the property shall be deemed to ha ve acquired it equally.  
417. Power to transfer private property:  A person may transfer his or 
her private property to  another person without  any one's consent.
229 
 
418. Joint property may be sold by way of sale:  (1) A joint property 
may be sold and transferred with the consent of all of its owners. 
(2) Even though all th e owners do not agr ee to transfer the 
joint property pursuant to sub-sect ion (1), any owner may transfer 
the property of his or her right or portion. 
(3) If, in making a transfer pursua nt to sub-section (1), it is 
technically not possible  to separate the righ t or portion of any 
owner from the joint property, and another owner intends to acquire 
such property, that other owner shal l be entitled to obtain it at the 
price mutually agreed upon between the owners. 
(4) If more than one owner intend to acquire the joint 
property, the owner who agrees to  pay the highest price shall be 
entitled to obtain such property. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (3), 
if the other owners do not intend to  acquire the right or portion of 
any owner and it is no t possible technically to separate such 
property and, the whole of the joint property shall be sold and the 
proceeds of sale shall be divided between th e owners according to 
their respective right or po rtion in that property. 
(6) If any person transfer s the joint property in 
contravention of sub-sect ion (1), only the transf er of the extent of 
his or her right or portion in such  property shall be  valid, and the 
concerned person shall be entitled  to get return of the property 
transferred in excess of the righ t or portion of the transferor. 
419. Prohibition of transferring  property in common without 
obtaining consent:  (1) No person shall, without obtaining written
230 
 
consent of the coparceners in co mmon, transfer a property in 
common to another person. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if a coparcener of th e joint family is a witness to the deed of 
transfer of a property in common, consent of that coparcener shall 
be deemed to have  been obtained. 
(3) If any person transfers a property in common in 
contravention of sub-section (1), th e transfer of ti tle only to the 
extent of such right or portion that person has in that property shall 
be valid. The concerned coparcener shall be entitled to get back the 
property transferred in exces s of such right or portion. 
420. Property in common may be  sold for household purpose:  
Notwithstanding anything containe d in Section 419, the person 
acting as the head of family may,  for the household purpose, sell 
whole of the property in common, in  the case of a movable property, 
and the half of such property, in the case of an im movable property, 
without consent of the others. 
421. Prohibition of tran sferring other's property:  (1) No person shall 
transfer a property to another person in which any one else has right 
and ownership. 
(2) If any person transfers a property in contravention of 
sub-section (1), such a deed or transaction shall be void. 
(3) If the real owner makes a claim in the property 
transferred pursuant to sub-sect ion (1), the tran sferee of such 
property shall return it to the concerned owner.
231 
 
(4) If a person finds any lost or stolen property, the owner 
of such property may claim it, alo ng with evidence showing his or 
her ownership, within three year s after the date on which the 
property was lost or stolen. 
(5) If any person claims such  property pursuant to sub-
section (4), the finder of that prop erty shall return it to the owner, 
by collecting the amount of expens es, if any, incurred in its 
preservation or maintenance. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (4), 
if a person has acquired any stol en or lost property by way of 
purchase at a public market or au ction or bidding made publicly by 
any person or body, the person sha ll not be bound to return such 
property to the real ow ner unless and until he or  she obtains the real 
value of such property and the fees  or amount, if any, paid by him 
or her in the acquisition of such property.  
422. Prohibition of transferri ng property in duplication:  (1) No 
person shall re-transfer to another person a property which he or she 
has already transferred to some other person. 
(2) If any person transfers a property in contravention of 
sub-section (1), the deed  of transfer registered  at an earlier date 
shall get legal validity if the transfer of an immovable property has 
been made, and if the tr ansfer of a movable property has been made, 
the transfer to the person who acqui res the property earlier shall be 
valid. 
423. Donation or gift incapable of  being effected by guardian or 
curator: No guardian or curator may donate or gift any property
232 
 
belonging to the person under his or  her guardianship or curatorship 
to any person. 
424. Entitlement to amount or comp ensation in even t of deprivation 
of enjoyment of property:  (1) If a person tr ansfers a property by 
way of sale pursuant to this Chap ter and the purcha ser is deprived 
of enjoying the property wholly or partly becau se of such transfer 
being invalid for any reason, the purchaser shall be entitled to 
recover from the transferor the am ount paid by him or her for the 
property to the extent that he or she is so deprived  of enjoying, an 
interest to be set by yearly ten percent of the amount and the 
registration fee or other amount, if any, he or she has paid for the 
transfer of that prop erty as if it were an unsecured bond ( Kapali). 
(2) If any person makes any structure in a property 
purchased pursuant to this Chapte r and is not able to enjoy that 
property because of such  transfer being invali d for any reason, that 
person may demolish and take aw ay the structure made by him or 
her within six months. 
(3) If any person is aggrieved from the transfer of a 
property in contrave ntion of Sections 4 19, 421 and 422 or the 
failure to demolish and take away  any structure pursuant to sub-
section (2), such a person shall also be entitled to a reasonable 
compensation for actual  loss and damage su ffered by him or her 
from such transferor, in addition to the amount referred to in sub-
section (1).  
(4) If a person who may be entitled to a donation or who is 
entitled to a donation or gift is aggrieved from being unable to use 
the property for any r eason under this Chapter,  the person shall be
233 
 
entitled to get a reasonable co mpensation from the person making 
donation or gift, subj ect to the other Sectio ns of this Chapter. 
Provided that comp ensation cannot be re covered in the case 
of a testamentary gift being void. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, a person who obtains a property in any of the following 
circumstances shall not be entitled to recover the amount referred to 
in sub-sections (1 ), (3) and (4): 
(a) If he or she has obtaine d the property knowingly 
that it was other’s property or a stolen property, 
(b) If he or she has obtaine d the property knowingly 
that it was already transf erred to another person. 
  425.  Right in property may be transferred by attorney:  (1) If a 
person appoints another person, who is competent to be  an attorney 
in accordance with law, as his or her authoriz ed attorney indicating 
the reason that he or she is not ab le to appear in person before the 
concerned office in order to sell an d transfer his or her immovable 
property, such an author ized attorney may, on his or her behalf, sell 
and transfer his or her pr operty to another person. 
(2) A person may sell his or her movable property through 
his or her attorn ey or agent. 
426. Procedure to be followed by body corporate while purchasing 
or transferring property: (1) If, in transferring an immovable 
property held in the name of a body corporate established in 
accordance with law, the board of directors of such a body gives 
power by a decision to  any member of the bo ard of directors or
234 
 
employee of such a body to transfer the property, such a person 
may transfer the pr operty on behalf of such a body. 
(2) If the procedure referred to in sub-section (1) is 
fulfilled while purchasing or ot herwise obtaining an immovable 
property in the name of a corporate body, the property may be 
purchased or obtained in the name of such a body. 
427. Property may be purchased or ob tained by other person on 
one’s behalf: If, except the ci rcumstance set forth in Section 426, a 
person who purchases or obtains a property in accord ance with this 
Chapter is, for any reason, unable to  appear in person before the 
concerned office and gives a power of attorney, acco mpanied by his 
or her citizenship certifi cate, to a person who is  competent to be an 
attorney by law in relation to the purchase or ob tainment of the 
property, such an attorney may pur chase or obtain the property in 
the name of that person. 
428. Property may be purchased or obtained in the name of 
incompetent or quasi -competent person:  A guardian or curator 
may acquire any property by way of donation, gi ft, purchase or 
otherwise for incompetent, quasi co mpetent minor or a guardian or 
member of undivided family for the baby in the womb under his or 
her guardianship or curatorship. 
429. Registration and deregistration of  property right in which is 
transferred in testament: (1) If a person transf ers his or her right 
in a property to another person wi th testamentary effect and such 
transferor of property dies, one  who obtains the property shall 
submit an application, accompan ied by the death registration 
certificate as well as ot her evidences, to the co ncerned office for the
235 
 
transmission of the property to hi m or her, within six months after 
the date of the tr ansferor’s death. 
(2) If an application is subm itted pursuant to sub-section 
(1), the concerned office shall exam ine the deed maintained in it 
and make necessary inquiry as to  whether the deed executor has 
died or not and the deed is void or not. 
(3) If, upon an inqui ry made pursuant to sub-section (2), it 
appears that the transfer or of the property ha s died and has not got 
the deed voided, such property shall be transm itted to the applicant. 
(4) If any person submits an application to the office for 
the transmission after the expiration of the time-limit referred to in 
sub-section (1), the office shall transmit such property to the 
applicant in accordance wi th such a deed, by co llecting the fees by 
five hundred rupees for each year after the expirati on of the time-
limit. 
430. Not to claim for damage, destroy or low quality: A person who 
has once purchased a property from  another person shall not be 
entitled to make a claim that such  property is damaged, destroyed 
or of low quality.  
  Provided that if the seller has sold the property by 
misrepresentation or with deviation from the particulars set forth in 
the deed, the purchaser shall be entitled to compensation for the 
same. 
431. Property may be exchanged:  (1) Any person ma y exchange his or 
her property with another person  with or without adding any 
amount.
236 
 
(2) A deed shall be execute d in accordance with law in 
exchanging a prop erty pursuant to this Act. 
432. Restriction on transfer of im movable property to foreigner:  (1) 
No person shall, without obta ining prior permission of the 
Government of Nepal, transfer  any immovable property to a 
foreigner but for the person w ho has acquired the non-resident 
citizenship of Nepal, it will be  according to prevailing law. 
(2) If any person transfers any immovable property to a 
foreigner in contravention of sub-s ection (1), the relevant deed shall 
ipso facto  be void, and such proper ty shall devolve on the 
Government of Nepal. 
(3) The amount invested by th e creditor in the obtainment 
of an immovable property pursua nt to sub-section (1) shall be 
equivalent to an un secured bond (Kapali). 
433. Foreigner to  transfer partition share or  inheritance, if any 
obtained: (1) If any foreigner obtain s a partition share in or 
succeeds to any immovabl e property in Nepal,  the property shall 
not be eligible to be transferred to  or registered in  his or her name 
nor shall he or she be entitled to enjoy the income of  that property, 
except where so permitted by the Government of Nepal. 
  Provided that this provision shall not ap ply to a person who 
has obtained non-reside nt Nepali citizenship.  
(2) Any foreigner who obtain s any partition share or 
succession pursuant to sub-section (1) shall transfer such property 
to a citizen of Nepal in any manne r, and the concer ned office shall,
237 
 
for that purpose, issue a provis ional landownership registration 
certificate valid for the day of transfer of right. 
(3) If the foreigner fails to transfer a partition share or 
succession obtained in his or her name pursua nt to sub-section (1) 
to a citizen of Nepal pur suant to sub-section (2 ) at any time, in the 
case of the partition share, and with in three years of  its obtainment, 
in the case of succession, the Govern ment of Nepal sh all have right 
in such property after the ex piration of that time-limit. 
434. Statute of limitation:  A lawsuit may be made within the statute of 
limitation, if any, specified separately  in this Chapter, at any time in 
the case of Section 432, and, in relation to the other cases, within 
six months after the date of know ledge of any act done or action 
taken pursuant to this Chapter, by a person who is aggrieved from 
such act or an action.
238 
 
Chapter-12 
Provisions Relating to Mort gage of Immovable Property 
435. Property deemed to be mortgaged:  (1) If a debtor gives the whole 
or any portion of an immovable pr operty in which the debtor has 
right, ownership or possession to a creditor in consideration for a 
loan which the debtor borrows fr om the creditor, entitling the 
creditor to possess that  property with effect  from the date of 
execution of the d eed or after a certain peri od, such property shall 
be deemed to have been given in mortgage. 
(2) If the deed provides that the creditor is entitled to 
possess the property mortgaged pursu ant to sub-section (1) with 
immediate effect at th e time of lending or after a certain period, 
such a mortgage shall be deemed to be a mortgage with possession 
(Bhogbandaki), and if the deed provides that the cr editor is entitled 
to possess the property in the even t of the debtor’s default on 
repayment of the loan within the de adline set by the creditor and the 
debtor for repayment, such a mort gage shall be deemed to be a 
mortgage without possession ( Drishtibandhaki).  
(3) A property to be mortgaged shall be of such nature as 
may be capable of being enjoyed by the mortgagee. 
(4) A person shall not mortgage a property in which he or 
she has not right, ownership or poss ession or which he or she will 
acquire in the future.  
436. Deed to be executed:  (1) A deed shall be  executed in accordance 
with law for mortgaging any property pursuant to this Chapter.
239 
 
(2) A person executing the de ed of mortgage shall be 
competent in accord ance with law. 
437. Mortgaged property to be  possessed and enjoyed: (1) The 
creditor shall possess and enjoy th e property in mortgage with 
possession from the date of execution  of the deed thereon or from a 
particular date, if any, specified in the deed, and the property in 
mortgage without possession within  two years of the expiration of 
the date for repayment of loan by the debtor.  
(2) If, for any reason, the cred itor is not able to possess 
and enjoy such property within the pe riod referred to in sub-section 
(1) or if the debtor does not allo w, by any means, the creditor to 
possess and enjoy it,  the creditor may make a lawsuit in accordance 
with law for effecting the posse ssion and enjoyment of such 
property. 
(3) If the creditor fails to possess and enjoy the property 
pursuant to sub-section (1) or to  make a lawsuit for effecting its 
possession and enjoyment pursuant  to sub-section (2), such a 
mortgage shall ipso facto be inoperative. 
(4) If the deed of a mortgage  becomes inoperative pursuant 
to sub-section (3), th e deed shall be equiva lent to an unsecured 
bond (Kapali). 
438. Possessory right in  mortgaged property to be deemed 
transferred: If any person mortgages an y property, the possessory 
right in such property shall be d eemed to have been transferred to 
the creditor from the date of its  possession and enjoyment by the 
creditor.
240 
 
439. Entitlement to possess as  if it belonged to oneself: (1) The 
creditor shall be entitled to possess and enjoy the property 
mortgaged to him or her and fruit,  benefit and facility brought out 
from such property as  if the same were his or her own property.  
(2) If the creditor is not ab le to possess and enjoy the 
property mortgaged to him or her because of its incapability of 
being transferred or of any hindrance or obstruction by the debtor, 
the debtor shall pay a reasonable compensation to the creditor for 
the same. 
440. Duty to take re asonable care of (herbichar)  mortgaged 
property: (1) After acquiring possessory right in the mortgaged 
property, the creditor shall take a reasonable care a nd protection of 
that property as if it were his or her own. 
(2) The creditor himself or herself shall pay the tax or 
charge, if any, payable by law fo r the possession and enjoyment of 
the mortgaged property. 
Provided that the de btor shall pay the land revenue payable 
by law. 
(3) If the creditor is not ab le to possess and enjoy the 
mortgaged property because of a ny hindrance or obstruction by any 
person other than the debtor, the creditor may make a lawsuit in 
accordance with law for its possession and enjoyment. 
441. Interest, charge or fee not to be collected: (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained elsewhere in this Act, no creditor who has lent 
money against the security of mo rtgage with possession in a
241 
 
property shall collect any kind of interest, charge or fee in 
consideration of such loan from the debtor.  
(2) After the creditor has acquired possession in the 
property of mortgage without po ssession, the creditor shall not 
collect any kind of interest, charge  or fee in consid eration for such 
loan. 
442. Period for possession and enjo yment of property in mortgage 
with possession: (1) Except as otherwise pr ovided in the deed of 
mortgage, no property in mort gage with possession may be 
possessed and enjoye d for a period ex ceeding ten years.  
(2) If the property in mortgage  with possession is not 
redeemed within the peri od referred to in sub- section (1), the deed 
of mortgage shall be equiva lent to an unsecured bond.  
443. Maximum period of mort gage without possession: (1)  No period 
of a mortgage without possession in a proper ty shall exceed five 
years. 
(2) No creditor is entitled to take action for effecting 
possession in the property in mortgage without possession or 
having recovery of the related lo an from the debtor prior to the 
completion of the period referr ed to in sub-section (1). 
(3) After the expiry of the peri od referred to in sub-section 
(1), the property may be possesse d for a period no t exceeding ten 
years. 
(4) If the property given in mortgage without possession is 
not redeemed within the period of  ten years after the possession
242 
 
pursuant to sub-section (3), the rele vant deed shall be equivalent to 
an unsecured bond. 
444. Redemption of mortgaged property at any time: The debtor may, 
at any time, redeem his or her property from the creditor by 
repaying the loan, in the case of a property given in mortgage with 
possession, and also the interest, if  any, payable on the loan, in the 
case of a property given in mortga ge without possession, to the 
creditor. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if the property in mort gage is a cultivable la nd and the creditor has 
already planted crops in such a land at the time of redemption, the 
creditor shall be entitled to posse ss and enjo y such crops except as 
otherwise agreed upon between the creditor and the debtor. 
445. Property in mortga ge may be remortgaged: (1) A person who 
has obtained a property in mortgage  shall be entitled to remortgage 
such property or any part thereof to  another person in consideration 
for an amount which is equal to , or lesser than, the amount 
specified in the deed of  mortgage, and in such  a case, a re-mortgage 
is deemed to have been created. 
Provided that a mortga ged property shall not be the object of 
re-mortgage prior to the existence of the possessory right in such 
property. 
(2) The period of possession  and enjoyment of the re-
mortgage given pursua nt to sub-section (1 ) shall not exceed the 
period of possession and en joyment under the mortgage.
243 
 
(3) If the debtor who has right and ownership in the 
property intends to re deem the property re-mor tgaged pursuant to 
sub-section (1), the debtor may redeem the property upon payment 
of the price directly from the re-mortgagee if  the price of the re-
mortgage is equal to the original  price and through the original 
mortgagee if such price is le ss than the original price. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, the transactio n of remortgage made inconsistent with the 
terms of the mortgage shall ipso facto  be void to the extent of such 
inconsistency. 
(5) If the creditor is not enti tled to possess the property re-
mortgaged pursuant to this Chapter,  the deed of su ch a re-mortgage 
shall be equivalent to an unsecured bond ( Kapali). 
446. Fruits or benefits of  property may be mortgaged:  
Notwithstanding anything containe d in Section 445, a creditor who 
has obtained a property in mortgage  may, instead of remortgaging 
the whole property, remortgage only the fruits, benefit or facility of 
such property, or, if such propert y is a cultivable land, only the 
crops, products, trees, bamboo trees, reaped or to be  reaped fruits, 
vegetables, flowers or any other ki nds of products to be yielded 
from such land. 
447. Mortgaging by third pa rty on behalf of debtor:  (1) A third 
person may, in consideration fo r a loan borrowed  by a debtor, 
mortgage a property in which the third person has right and 
ownership to the creditor on behalf of the debtor.
244 
 
(2) The creditor shall, pursuant to this Chapter, be entitled 
to possess and enjoy the property mortgaged pursuant to sub-
section (1) as if it were the property mortgaged by the debtor to the 
creditor. 
(3) If a property is mortgaged by a third pers on pursuant to 
sub-section (1), the relationship between the debtor and the third 
person shall be governed by the d eed of mortgage or other separate 
contract, and in the defa ult of such provision, such transaction shall 
be equivalent to an unsecured bond (Kapali). 
448. Property in mortgage to be indivisible: (1) A property mortgaged 
by a debtor to a creditor shall remain indivisibl e notwithstanding 
the creation of more than  one creditor by virtue of the partition or 
succession between the creditor’s  coparceners or the division 
between creditor’s partners, and the debtor shall not be entitled to 
redeem the whole or any portion of  the mortgaged pr operty until the 
loan borrowed by him or her is repa id in full in accordance with the 
deed of mortgage.  
(2) If more than one debtor are maintained by virtue of the 
partition, succession be tween the debtor’s copa rceners or division 
between the debtor’s partners, the mortgaged property shall not be 
liable to redemption until each debt or repays his or  her respective 
portion of the loan in full. 
449. Creditor to be liable for loss and damage to property in 
mortgage: (1) After the creation of the creditor’s possessory right 
in the property in mort gage, the creditor shall be liable for any kind 
of loss or damage, if any, cause d to the property in mortgage.
245 
 
(2) In the event of any loss or  damage to the property in 
mortgage pursuant to sub-section (1), the creditor shall so repair 
such property, at his or her cost, as to restore it  into its original form. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
the creditor shall not be liable fo r any loss or damage to the 
property in mortgage caused by a disaster, and the creditor shall 
repair such loss or damage with the debtor's consent in writing. 
(4) The debtor shall, while redeeming the property in 
mortgage, pay also the expenses in curred in the maintenance under 
sub-section (3), in addition to th e loan borrowed fr om the creditor. 
450. Not to create trouble on property in mortgage: After the creation 
of the possessory right in the property in mortgage, the creditor 
shall not so trouble the debtor stating that such property is 
inappropriate or inaccurate or less as to be inconsistent with the 
terms of the deed.  
  Provided that nothing shall ba r the making of a claim for the 
repayment of a loan in  accordance with the deed  of mortgage if the 
creditor is not entitled to possess the property in mortgage for any 
reason or if the property is held to be defective for any reason. 
451. Mortgage not to be made to foreigner: No person may mortgage 
an immovable property to a fore ign person other than a person 
having obtained the non-resident Nepali citizenship, without prior 
approval of the Government of Nepal.  
452. Not to be mortgaged or  transferred in duplication:  (1) No 
property once mortgaged may be mort gaged or transferred again, in 
duplication, to other person.
246 
 
(2) If a person mortgages a pr operty in duplication in 
contravention of sub-section (1), the deed register ed at an earlier 
date shall be valid and the subsequent deed shall ipso facto be void. 
(3) If a deed become s void pursuant to sub-section (2), the 
amount of a creditor who know ingly executes the deed in 
duplication shall lapse, and that  of a creditor who executes it 
without knowledge of duplication shall be equivalent to an 
unsecured bond (Kapali). 
(4) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
in the event of th e execution of d eeds in duplication, and the first 
deed providing for any kind of mortgage and the second deed 
providing for the transfer of title, the transferee sha ll be entitled to 
establish the title by making repaym ent of loan in  accordance with 
the first deed of mortgage. 
(5) One who executes a deed in  duplication as mentioned 
in this Section shall be liable to th e punishment with a fine of a sum 
that is equal to the amount in cont roversy, if any, indicated in the 
second deed, to the amount indicated  in the earlier deed, if such 
amount in controversy is not indi cated in the second deed, and a 
sum not exceeding twenty -five thousand rupees  if no such amount 
is indicated even in  the earlier deed. 
Provided that a fine  in excess of one hun dred thousand rupees 
shall not be imposed irrespectiv e of the sum of  amount in 
controversy. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, in the event of  the execution of the deed of mortgage in
247 
 
duplication, possessory right shall be established within two years 
from the date of the first deed if it provides for mortgage with 
possession (Bhogbhandhaki) and with in two years from the date of 
entitlement to the poss essory right if the fi rst deed provides for 
mortgage without possessory right (Drishtibandhaki). 
(7) In the event of a failure to establish the possessory 
right pursuant to sub-section (6 ), the creditor's amount shall be 
equivalent to an un secured bond (Kapali). 
453. Statute of limitation:  A lawsuit may be made within the statute of 
limitation, if any, specified separa tely in this Chapter, and, in 
relation to the other cases, within a period of one year  after the date 
on which any act was done or actio n was taken pursuant to this 
Chapter, by a person who is aggrieved from such an act or action.
248 
 
Chapter-13 
Provisions Relating to Pre-em ption of Immovable Property 
454. Pre-emption deemed to be made:  If a person transfers, in any 
manner, any immovable property in which that person has right, 
ownership and possession to anothe r person and anyone who is in 
neighbor of such property red eems it in accordance with this 
Chapter, pre-emption shall be deemed to be made. 
  Explanation: For the purposes of this  Chapter, th e term “in 
neighbor of" includes a situation where a ditch, water supply, 
passage, exit etc. for one will be closed by the reason  that one does 
not have other’s house or land that is bordering one’s house or land 
and has been transferred. 
455. Entitlement of heir to pre-emption:  (1) If a person sells his or her 
immovable property, the heir in neighbor of su ch property may pre-
empt such property u pon payment of the amount paid by the buyer 
of that property as we ll as the fees incurred in course of approval of 
deed to the buyer.  
(2) If there are more than one heir who intend to make pre-
emption pursuant to sub-section (1),  the nearest heir , and, if such 
heirs are also more th an one, the heir who is the most immediate 
neighbor, and, if even such heirs are more than one, all the heirs 
may pre-empt such proper ty in equal proportion. 
(3) If the nearest heir does not pre-empt such property 
pursuant to sub-section (2), the he ir who is the nearest in the order 
of preference may pre- empt such property.
249 
 
456. Pre-emption by tenant:  If there is no heir in neighbor of the 
property pursuant to Section 455 or even if there is an heir, he or 
she does not intend to make pre-emption and if there is a tenant in 
accordance with law in such a property, the tenant may pre-empt 
such property. 
457. Pre-emption of sold house: (1) If there are diff erent owners of the 
different parts of the same house and the owner of a part sells his or 
her part to another person, the owne r of another part may, if he or 
she intends to pre-empt that part, preempt such a pa rt of the house 
by paying the amount paid by the buy er and the fee in curred in the 
registration of the deed to the buyer. 
  (2) In making pre-emption purs uant to sub-section (1), the 
following person shall get preference as follows: 
(a) If the owner of the other part  is the heir, such an  heir, 
and if there are mo re than one heir, the nearest heir, 
(b) If the owner of the other part is a person other than the 
heir, the owner in neighbor of  or the owner of the part 
adjoining such a part. 
458. Pre-emption of house donated or gifted: (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in  Section 455,456 or  457, if any person 
relinquishes in any manner his or her right in and donates or gifts 
the half part of the same house or  any portion thereof or the land 
occupied by or appurtenant to the house an d the donee has 
transferred the right in the house or land in any manner to another 
person, the donor or his or her heir  residing in the same place may,
250 
 
if he or she so intend s, pre-empt such a hous e or any portion thereof 
or the land occupied by or appurtenant to the house.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if a person gets a donation or gift of the half part or any portion of 
the same house or the la nd occupied by or ap purtenant to the house 
from a donor and the do nor donates or gifts th e remaining part of 
such a house or land to another person, the former donee or giftee 
or his or her heir may pre-empt su ch remaining part or portion.  
(3) In making pre-emption pursuan t to sub-section (1) or 
(2), the figure of price, if any,  indicated in the instrument of 
donation or gift, and amount equal to  the prevailing market price, if 
such figure is not so indicate d, and the fees incurred in the 
registration of the deed shall be paid  to the creditor. 
(4) If, there are more than one  heir intending to make pre-
emption pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the nearest heir, and the 
most aggrieved heir, if  even the nearest heir s are more than one, 
may make pre-emption. 
459. Where pre-emption is not permitted:  Notwithstanding anything 
contained in Sections 457 and 458, any part of or house built under 
the provision of joint housing sha ll not be subject to pre-emption. 
460. Procedures for making pre-emption:  (1) A person who intends to 
make pre-emption of any immovabl e property pursuant to this 
Chapter shall make a pe tition to the office making registration of 
the relevant deed, and such a peti tion has to be accompanied by a 
deposit of an amount equal to the price of the prop erty to be pre-
empted, if any, indicated in the d eed registered for the transfer of
251 
 
such property, or an amount equal to the prevailing market price if 
such price is not indicat ed in the deed , and the fees charged in the 
approval of registra tion of such a deed. 
(2) If a petition is received purs uant to sub-section (1), the 
office that approves the registration of the deed shall hold the 
petitioner on recognizance and se nd a process of summon to the 
person obliged to allow preemption to  appear in the office, within a 
period of seven days excluding the time required for journey. 
(3) If the person obliged to  allow preemption appears and 
consents to preemption within the time limit as referred to in sub-
section (2), the office that approves the registration of  the deed shall 
effect preemption by paying to him or her the amount deposited 
pursuant to sub-section (1). 
(4) If, despite that the pers on obliged to al low preemption 
does not appear and consent to preemption within the time-limit 
referred to in sub-sec tion (2), it appears from  the received petition, 
registered deed and reco rds of the office that pre-emption is to be 
effected, the office that approves registration of the deed shall make 
decision to effect pre- emption, and if it appears that pre-emption is 
not to be made, that office shall make decision no t to effect pre-
emption and give according in formation to the petitioner. 
(5) If the person obliged to  allow pre-emption does not 
appear within the time limit referred to in sub-section (2), and, after 
the expiration of the time limit, if it appears fr om the received 
petition, registered deed  and records of the of fice that pre-emption 
is to be effected, the office sh all make decision to effect pre-
emption and give an execution slip  to the person entitled to pre-
252 
 
emption to enjoy the property to be pre-empted, and send a notice 
to the person obliged to allow pr eemption to receive  the amount of 
deposit made pursuant to sub-section (1). 
(6) If the person obliged to allow pre-emption appears 
within the time-limit referred to in  sub-section (2) but expresses his 
or her disagreement with the mark et price of such property, the 
office that approves the registration of the deed  shall fix the market 
price of that property and eff ect pre-emption by having the amount 
equal to that market price paid to  the person obliged to allow pre-
emption. 
(7) If any party does not agr ee to the market  price of the 
property subject to pr e-emption fixed pursuant to sub-section (6) or 
if the person obliged to allow pr eemption appears within the time 
limit and shows the reason why pre-emption is not to be made, and 
it is necessary to decide it up on examination of evidence on the 
matter, the office that approves th e registration of the deed shall 
inform that the concerned person may make a lawsuit in the court 
within thirty-five days; and in su ch a case, action shall be taken 
pursuant to a decision of the court if a lawsuit has been filed within 
the time-limit, and pursuant to a deci sion of the offi ce if no such a 
lawsuit has been filed.  
(8) In returning the amount to the petitioner on holding 
that pre-emption cannot be made pu rsuant to sub-section (4), two 
and half percent of the amount depo sited pursuant to sub-section (1) 
shall be deducted. 
(9) If the person who has peti tioned for pre-emption does 
not subsequently intend, for any reason, to make pre-emption or
253 
 
fails to appear at the appointed dates, the of fice shall punish that 
person with a fine of three pe rcent of the amount of deposit 
furnished by him or her and the am ount that remains after deducting 
that fine from the amount of deposi t shall be returned to him or her. 
461. To update records upon pre-emption:  If it is held by the 
concerned office or cour t that pre-emption can be made pursuant to 
this Chapter, the office shall make entries into and update 
accordingly the records of the pre- empted property maintained in 
such an office.  
462. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggr ieved from any act 
done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may file a lawsuit 
within thirty-five days after the da te of knowledge thereof not later 
than six months after the date of registration of the deed.  
  Provided that a tenant may file a lawsuit within thirty-five 
days after the date of expiration of the date within which the land-
owner may make pre-emption.
254 
 
Chapter-14 
Provisions Relating to  Approval of Regi stration of Deeds 
463. Deed deemed to be registered: If any deed submitted by a person 
to the concerned office for approval pursuant to this Chapter is 
approved by such  an office, such a deed shall be deemed to be 
registered. 
  Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter, the term 
“concerned office” means such an of fice as may be designated by 
the Government of Nepal, by a no tification in the Nepal Gazette, 
and includes the concerned Land Rev enue Office until the office is 
so designated. 
464. Deeds to be registered: (1) In making any of the following deeds, 
such a deed shall be got regist ered with the concerned office:  
(a) A deed transferring th e right in an immovable 
property in any manner, 
(b) A deed of mortgage with possession, mortgage 
without possession or re-mortgage, 
(c) A deed on donation or gift of immovable property 
in testament, 
(d) A deed on exchange of immovable property, 
(e) A deed on partition or relinquishment of partition 
share of property in common, 
(f) A deed on separation of board and bread or 
unification of board and bread, 
(g) A deed on establis hment of a trust,
255 
 
(h) A deed on house rentin g with a monthly rent of 
more than one hundre d thousand rupees, 
(i) A deed on usufruct in  an immovable property, 
(j) Such other deed required  to be regist ered pursuant 
to this Act or law. 
(2) If any person fails to have registered a deed required to 
be registered pursuant to  sub-section (1), such  a deed shall not be 
legally recognized.  
465. Other deeds may be registered:  (1) A person may, if he or she so 
intends, have registered  also any deed other than that set forth in 
Section 464. 
(2) If a person makes an a pplication for the approval of 
registration of a deed  pursuant to sub-sectio n (1), the concerned 
office shall register su ch deed by fulfilling the legal requirements. 
466. Deed may be registered by commission:  (1) If a person makes an 
application to the concerned office for the approval of registration 
of a deed by a commission deputed by  the office and it appears that 
such a deed can be regi stered by that office, the chief of office or 
other employee deputed by him or her shall, on deposit with the 
office of the fees charg eable for such registra tion, visit the location 
indicated by the applicant within five days and register such a deed 
by fulfilling the legal requirements. 
(2) If the deed is approved  by a commission deputed 
pursuant to sub-section (1), the office shall credit into revenue the 
deposit made pursuant to that sub-section.
256 
 
(3) If, for any reason, the deed is not approved and 
registered by a commission deputed pu rsuant to sub-s ection (1), the 
applicant shall get refund of th e deposit within three months. 
(4) If the applicant fails to ge t refund of the deposit within 
the time-limit referred to in sub-s ection (3), the office shall credit 
such deposit into revenue. 
467. Deed may be approved and registered with office in  other 
district: (1) If the parties to a deed intend to ge t the deed approved 
and registered in a district other th an the district in  which either of 
them resides or the property is situated, they shall make an 
application, setting out the matter, to the concerned office of that 
district. 
(2) If an application is made for the registration of a deed 
pursuant to sub-section (1), such  an office shall make necessary 
inquiry into the matte r and approve and register such deed by 
fulfilling the legal requirements. 
(3) If a deed of immovable property is approved and 
registered in other di strict pursuant to sub- section (2), the office 
shall send a copy of the registered d eed to the relevant office of the 
concerned district. 
468. Fee chargeable for reg istration of deed:  (1) The fee specified by 
law shall be charged fo r the approval and regi stration of a deed. 
(2) Except where the law provid es for the fee of approval 
and registration of a deed, fee shall be charged according to the 
amount set forth in the deed dealing with transaction of money.
257 
 
Provided that if th e price of the immova ble property referred 
to in the deed is less than th e minimum price sp ecified by the 
Government of Nepal, the fee sh all be charged according to the 
price specified by the Government of Nepal. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) 
or (2), in registering a deed in  another district, there shall be 
charged an additional fee by ten per cent of the fee se t forth in that 
sub-section. 
469. Obligation to pay fees:  (1) The following person shall pay the fee 
chargeable for the registra tion of the following deed: 
(a) In the case of a deed transferring  a property or 
relating to mortgage, the transferee or mortgagee, 
 (b) In the case of a deed on  partition or relinquishment 
of partition share,  separation of board and bread or 
unification of board and br ead, all coparceners in 
equal portion, 
(c) In the case of a deed on  exchange of property, both 
parties to the deed, 
(d) In the case of a deed of testamentary gift, the donor 
or testator, 
(e) In the case of a deed on house renting, the house 
lord, 
(f) In case of a memorandum of establishment of trust, 
founder of a trust,
258 
 
(g) In the case of any other deed, both parties to the 
deed. 
(2) In registering the deed refe rred to in clause (e) of sub-
section (1), the fee shall be dete rmined considering the amount of 
rent of the first month receivabl e for house rent as the price. 
470. Provision relating to payment of amount: If any amount is to be 
paid and received between the par ties to a deed according to the 
deed intended to be approved and registered , such payment may be 
effected either in household or in pres ence of the concerned 
employee of the office or by a good for payment cheque.  
471. Transmission and registration and de-registration to be made:  
(1) If any transmission has to be e ffected in conse quence of a deed 
registered, the concerned office shall execute transmission, and 
registration and deregistrati on of the matter on the day of 
registration of the deed, and on the following day if it is not 
possible to do so on that day. 
(2) If any transmission and re gistration and deregistration 
of the matter have to be made in  the records of another office 
according to the deed regi stered by one office, the latter shall give a 
time-limit of thirty-five days to the transferee, thereby informing 
him or her to go to the concerne d office for the tr ansmission, and 
registration and deregist ration of the matter, an d send also the deed 
to the concerned office. 
(3) On receipt of a deed sent  by another district for the 
transmission, and registration an d deregistration of the matter 
pursuant to sub-section (2), the concerned office shall enter the
259 
 
matter of such registration into it s records and effect transmission 
and registration and deregistration of the matter according to the 
deed. 
472. Deed registered at earlier date to be valid:  In the event of 
approval and registration of more th an one deed in relation to the 
same matter, the deed approved and registered on the earlier date 
shall be valid. 
473. Statute of  limitation: (1) A person who is aggrieved from any act 
done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit 
within six months after the date on  which such an act was done or 
action was taken. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if a deed is approved and registered by an of fice of another area, a 
lawsuit may be made within one year  after the date of receipt by the 
concerned office of a co py of such a deed.
260 
 
Chapter-15 
Provisions Relating to Transactions 
474. Transaction deemed to be made:  (1) If there is give-and-take of 
any amount or goods between two or more persons subject to any 
condition, transaction shall be deemed to have been made between 
them. 
(2) If a transaction is made pu rsuant to sub-section (1), the 
receiver of amount or goods shall return the same to the giver of 
amount or goods. 
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter, the term 
“amount” includes the price of a goods. 
475. Loan deemed to be borrowed: If a person has an obligation to pay 
any amount or goods to anothe r person in any manner, such 
obligation shall be deemed to be a loan borrowed by that person, 
and such a person shall return  such amount or  goods to the 
concerned person, subject to th e provisions of this Chapter.  
476. Transaction not to be carri ed on without executing deed:  No 
person shall carry on transacti on without executing a deed in 
accordance with law. 
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter, the term 
“deed” means any document that  substantiates a transaction 
including a cheque, bill,  voucher and receipt. 
477. Matters to be se t out in deed:  In carrying on a transaction, the 
following matters shall be set ou t in the deed according to the 
nature of transaction:
261 
 
(a) Name, surname, age an d address of each person 
involved in transaction, and name of his or her 
father, mother, grand-fath er and grand-mother,  
  Provided that in the cas e of a married person, the 
name of his or her husband or wife, as the case may 
be, shall also be mentioned. 
(b) Reason for transaction, 
(c) Volume of transaction, 
(d) In the case of transaction of any good, pr ice of such 
goods, 
(e) In the case of exchange  of any goods by way of 
borrowing, loan or otherw ise, the matter to that 
effect, 
(f) Details of the goods,  if any, exchanged, 
(g) Date for repayment of  the transacted amount, 
(h) Rate of interest, if any, payable on the transaction, 
(i) Matter that the creditor may recover the amount 
involved in the transaction from the borrower's 
assets in the event of fail ure to repay such amount 
within the specified time or to fulfill the other 
conditions set forth in the deed, 
(j) Place of the deed executed, 
(k) Date of the deed executed, 
(l) Such other matters as required to be set out 
according to the nature  of transaction.
262 
 
478. Entitlement of creditor to  interest from debtor: (1) If a deed on 
transaction provides for the paymen t of interest, the creditor may 
collect the interest from the de btor as set forth in the deed.  
(2) The amount of interest which the creditor is entitled to 
collect from the debtor pursuant to sub-sectio n (1) shall not exceed 
ten percent of the pr incipal per annum. 
(3) If the deed executed pursua nt to sub-section (1) does 
not provide for the rate of intere st but only for the payment of 
interest, the creditor may collect inte rest from the debtor at the rate 
of ten percent of the principal per annum. 
(4) If the deed executed pur suant to sub-section (1) 
provides for the payment of profit instead of interest but does not 
specify the amount of such profit , the creditor may collect such 
profit from the debtor as if it were interest. 
479. Creditor not allowed to coll ect interest from debtor:  If the deed 
on transaction does no t provide for the payment of interest, the 
creditor shall not collect in terest from the debtor. 
480. Compound interest no t to be collected: (1) The creditor shall not 
collect compound interest from the debtor.  
(2) If any creditor collects compound interest from a 
debtor in contravention of sub-sect ion (1), such interest shall be 
deducted from the principal an d refunded if the principal has 
already been repaid. 
481. Interest in excess of princi pal not to be collected: 
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this  Chapter, the 
creditor shall not collect interest  in excess of the principal.
263 
 
482. Procedures to be fulfilled in pa ying and collectin g principal and 
interest: The following procedures shall be fulfilled in paying and 
collecting interest:  
(a) If the debtor repays the whole of the principal and 
interest, the creditor shall si gn and return the deed on 
transaction to the debtor by tearing out the deed or 
indicating on its space or reverse side that the loan has 
been repaid, 
(b) If the deed is not found at the time of repayment of the 
principal and interest pursuant to clause (a), the 
creditor shall give the debt or a receipt indicating the 
receipt of the particular am ount on the particular date, 
(c) In repaying some amount out of the principal and 
interest, the creditor shall indicate on the reverse side 
of the deed how much he or  she has received from the 
debtor on which date, and ge t the debtor to sign the 
deed and issue a separa te receipt of amount 
accordingly if the deed is no t found immediately or it 
is not with the credito r for the time being. 
483. Interest accruable as  of the date of recovery of amount: 
Notwithstanding anything contai ned elsewhere in this Chapter,  if 
the court passes a judgment on a la wsuit, if any, made within the 
period under Section 484 entitling th e creditor to recover interest as 
well, the creditor shall be  entitled to the interest as of the date of 
recovery according to the judgment.
264 
 
484. Period of deed exec uted in household: (1) The period of a deed 
executed in household pursuant to this Chapter shall not exceed ten 
years. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if the debtor repays some of the pr incipal or interest thereon to the 
creditor or the term of  a deed is extended for the repayment of 
principal or interest within the peri od of ten years, another period of 
ten years shall be extended from the date of such repayment of 
principal or interest or extension of the period, as the case may be. 
485. Transaction carried on  with incompetent or quasi-competent 
person not to be recognized: A transaction carried on by a person 
with an incompetent or  quasi-competent person  shall not get legal 
recognition. 
486. Recovery of amount not availab le from property in common:  
(1) If any person carries on trans action with another person and the 
deed of such transaction does not bear the signature of the person 
acting as the head of fa mily, the creditor sha ll not be entitled to 
recover his or her amount from such  property until the debtor's right 
in the property in common is established. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if the person acting as the head of  family repays such amount, the 
creditor may recover the same. 
(3) If any person is not able to recover the amount from 
the debtor on the occu rrence of the circumstan ce referred to in sub-
section (1), the creditor  shall make a lawsuit against the debtor and 
maintain his or her right with in a period of ten years.
265 
 
(4) In the event of the mainte nance of the right with the 
debtor pursuant to sub-section (3),  the creditor may recover his or 
her amount from the debtor in acco rdance with law after his or her 
right in the property in common has been established. 
(5) The statute of limitation fo r making a lawsuit shall, for 
the recovery of the amount pursua nt to sub-section (4), commence 
from the date of establishm ent of the debtor's right. 
487. Exchange of movable property not allowed without consent:  (1) 
A person of majority age in a joint family is not allowed to 
exchange any movable property in  common without consent of the 
person acting as th e head of family. 
Provided that the cons ent of the person ac ting as the head of 
family shall not be required to ex change his or her private property. 
(2) If a person exchanges a movable property in 
contravention of sub-section (1), the exchange of such property 
shall not be valid if the person ac ting as the head of family does not 
consent to such exchange. 
(3) If there is no consent of the person  acting as the head 
of family to the exchange of movable property made in 
contravention of sub-section (1), the property so exchanged may be 
taken back within thirty-five days. 
488. Recovery of amount if transactio n appears to have been carried 
on: Even though any person does no t execute a deed  by fulfilling 
the procedures referred to in this Chapter, if it appears from any 
deed, banking transaction, negotiable instrument,  cheque, voucher 
or book of account that  transaction has been carried on with any
266 
 
person, the court may, based on such deed, banking transaction, 
negotiable instrument , cheque, voucher or book of account, order 
the recovery of such amount from the debtor to the lawsuit maker. 
489. Procedure to be followed if deed executed on ho usehold is lost 
or destroyed due to  force majeure event:  (1) If a deed executed in 
household is lost or destroyed du e to a force maje ure event, the 
creditor shall make an application,  setting out the matter, to the 
concerned Local Level within fifteen  days from the date of loss or 
occurrence of the for ce majeure event.  
(2) If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (1), 
the concerned Local Level shall dr aw up a receipt setting out the 
matter and issue the recei pt, sealed with  the stamp of the office, to 
the applicant.  
(3) If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (1), 
the Local Level shall summon the pr esence of the deed  executor, if 
he or she is alive, and of the n earest heir, if such  executor is not 
alive, within seven days, and cause a deed to be prep ared as per the 
original deed, if he or  she so consents, and authenticate such deed 
and deliver it to the applicant. 
(4) If the deed executor do es not consent to execute 
another deed indicating that the deed was lost or destroyed due to a 
force majeure event purs uant to sub-section (3 ), the creditor shall 
make a lawsuit and maintain his or  her right, showing the evidence 
of the loss of deed or  occurrence of the force majeure event, within 
thirty-five days of the e xpiry of that time-limit.
267 
 
490. To return goods transacted  in the event of imperfection:  (1) 
Except as otherwise prov ided for in the deed, if the receiver of any 
goods transacted with specification of price is not able to possess 
the goods due to th e fact that the go ods do not correspo nd to that set 
forth in the deed or are imperfect for any r eason, he or she shall 
give a notice thereof to the giver of goods within thirty-five days of 
such transaction. 
(2) If a notice is received from the receiver of goods 
pursuant to sub-section (1) and hi s or her statement appears to be 
reasonable, the exchange  of goods shall be ma de if the giver has 
similar other goods, and if the give r does not have such goods, he or 
she shall get back his or her goods and cancel the deed executed in 
relation to such transaction. 
(3) If the giver of goods refuse s to exchange or to take 
back the goods pursuant  to sub-section (2), the receiver of goods 
may make a lawsuit to have recovery of an amount equivalent to 
the price of such  goods and a reasonable compensation for the loss 
and damage caused to him or her fr om the concerned person or get 
such transaction to be void. 
491. To return goods in original condition:  (1) If any person obtains or 
borrows for any specific purpose any goods owned or possessed by 
another person whether for rent or not or for borrowing or not or on 
any other terms and conditions, the person shall, after the 
completion of the purpose, return  the goods that are the same in 
kind, quantity and quality  as have been so acq uired or borrowed, to 
the owner or possessor.
268 
 
(2) If the goods obtained pursua nt to sub-section (1) are 
lost, broken, destroyed, out of or der or otherwise damaged, except 
as otherwise provided for in th e deed, the person obtaining such 
goods shall return similar other g oods to the owner or possessor or 
pay to the owner or possessor an amount equivalent to the 
prevailing market price of such goods if similar other goods are not 
available. 
(3) Except as otherwise provided for in the deed in relation 
to the return of, or payment of  rent or amount for, the goods 
pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2 ), such goods or rent shall be 
returned or paid to the owner or possessor within fifteen days after 
the completion of the purpose for which the goods were obtained. 
(4) If the person obtaining the goo ds fails to return or pay 
the goods or amount to the owner or possessor within the time-limit 
under sub-section (3), the aggrie ved person may recover the amount 
of such goods and a r easonable compensation, as well, for the loss 
caused to him or her. 
492. Statute of limitation: (1) There shall be no statute of limitation for 
making a lawsuit in the matter of tr ansaction carried on with intent 
to take rights to, misappropriate , cause loss to, or disorder, the 
property of an incompetent and qua si-competent person or in the 
matter of collection of compound intere st or collection of interest in 
excess of ten percent.  
(2) Except as provided  for in sub-sectio n (1), a person who 
is aggrieved from any act done or  action taken pursuant to this 
Chapter may make a lawsuit as follow s from the date of such act or 
action:
269 
 
(a) Where this Chapter provid es for a separate statute 
of limitation for making a lawsuit, within such 
limitation, 
(b) Within a period of one year from the date of 
expiration of the period, if any, specified in any 
deed, and failing such a de ed, or in th e other cases, 
from the date of accrual of the cause of action.
270 
 
Part-5 
Provisions Relating to Cont ract and Other Obligations 
Chapter-1 
General Provisions Rela ting to Obligations 
493. Obligation to be created:  (1) If there is a legal compulsion for 
one to do or to abstain from doing any act, an obligation is created 
if one omits to do or does such an act. 
(2) The obligation to be created  pursuant to sub-section (1) 
shall be maintained and determin ed pursuant to this Chapter. 
494. Circumstances in which obligation is created: (1) The obligation 
under Section 493 shall be created  and maintained as follows: 
  (a) By a law, 
  (b) By a contract, 
  (c) By an indir ect or quasi-contract, 
  (d) By an unjust enrichment, 
(e) By an unilateral commitmen t of any person to assume 
obligation, 
(f) By an act to be treat ed as tort under law, 
(g) By an act to be  treated as a quas i-tort under law. 
 (2) In regard to sub-section (1), 
(a) The obligation referred to in  clause (a) shall be created 
under this Act or other law. 
(b) The obligation referred to in  clause (b) shall be created 
under a contact entered into between the parties.
271 
 
(c) The obligation referred to in  clause (c) shall be created 
under an indirect or quasi -contact as defined in 
Chapter-15 of this Part. 
(d) The obligation referred to in  clause (d) shall be created 
under an unjust enrichment as defined in Chapter-16 of 
this Part. 
(e) The obligation referred to  in clause (e) shall be 
determined under provision for creating obligation 
under law through an unilateral commitment. 
(f) The obligation referred to in  clause (f) shall be created 
under torts as defined in Chapter-17 of this Part. 
(g) The obligation referred to in  clause (g) shall be created 
from the defective product as defined in Chapter-18 of 
this Part or from other act to be deemed as a quasi-tort 
under law. 
495. Obligation to be fulfilled:  (1) A person shall himself or herself 
fulfill the obligation of any matter which has been so maintained or 
created as to be fulfilled by him or her or which he or she has 
undertaken to fulfill. 
(2) If such a person dies or becomes of unsound mind prior 
to the fulfillment of the obligati on pursuant to sub-section (1), the 
heir succeeding to his or her prop erty or his or her guardian or 
curator or the guarantor in the case of a contract relating to 
guarantee shall fulfil l such obligation.
272 
 
496. Obligation to be fulfilled within the prescribed time: (1) If a 
certain period has been  specified for fulfilling any obligation, the 
concerned person shall fulfill such  an obligation within that period.  
(2) If a certain day or time ha s been specified  for fulfilling 
any obligation, the concerned person  shall fulfill such obligation on 
that day or at that time. 
Provided that if ther e is a stipulation that  the obligation shall 
be fulfilled within certain day or time, the obligation may be 
fulfilled even prior to  such day or time. 
(3) If no period, day or time  has been specified under sub-
section (1) or (2), the period,  day or time for fulfilling the 
obligation shall be determined ha ving regard to the nature of 
obligation and the obligation shall be fulfilled with in a reasonable 
period. 
(4) If any obligation is not fulf illed pursuant to sub-section 
(1), (2) or (3), the person who is bound to fulfill the obligation shall 
be deemed to have not been fulfil led, or to have been unable to 
fulfill, the obligation. 
497. Each person to  fulfill obligation:  (1) If more than one person have 
undertaken to fulfill an obligation or such an obli gation has been 
created in relation to them, every person shal l, except as otherwise 
provided for in the contract, fulfill such  an obligation equally. 
(2) If any person is bound to fu lfill any obligation vis-à-vis 
more than one person, he or she sh all, except as otherwise provided 
for in the contract, fulfill the obligation vis-à-vis every person 
equally.
273 
 
498. Obligation may be divisible : (1) If any obligation has to be 
fulfilled vis-à-vis or  by more than one person and the obligation 
vis-à-vis or by such  persons is capable of being divided or 
fragmented, having regard to its nature, such obligation may be 
divided and shall be fulfilled by or vis-à-vi s every person 
accordingly. 
(2) In the circumstance referred to in sub-section (1), every 
person or all person s may demand for the fulfillment of the 
obligation by every person or all persons bound to fulfill such 
obligation. 
499. Obligation to be fulf illed in good faith:  The person who is bound 
to fulfill the obligation created pur suant to Section 494 shall fulfill 
it in good faith.  
500. To bear compensation for fa ilure to fulfill obligation:  (1) If a 
person bound to fulfill an y obligation fails to fu lfill it or delays its 
fulfillment, and there by a loss or damage is  caused to any other 
person in any manner, such a pers on shall bear co mpensation for 
the actual loss or da mage so caused. 
(2) If a person bound to fulf ill any obligation does not 
fulfill it by fraud or does any act  knowingly or recklessly, thereby 
any loss or damage is caused in any manner, such a person shall 
bear compensation for the loss or damage so caused. 
501. Obligation contrary to  law not to be fulfilled:  Notwithstanding 
anything contained elsewh ere in this Chapter, if the fulfillment of 
any obligation would be contrary to  law, public order or public 
morality, it shall not be required  to fulfill such an obligation.
274 
 
502. Impossible obligation not to be fulfilled:  (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained elsewh ere in this Chapter, if, at the time of its 
creation, any obligation of such  nature as is impossible for 
fulfillment has been created, su ch an obligation shall not be 
required to be fulfilled. 
(2) If any obligation which was possible for fulfillment at 
the time of its creation subseq uently becomes impossible for 
fulfillment, the consequence of su ch obligation shall be determined 
according to the law. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) 
or (2), if a portion of any obliga tion can be fulfilled and the rest 
portion cannot be fulfilled, the obligation shall be fulfilled to the 
extent that it can be fulfilled. 
503. Statute of limitation:  A person who is aggrieved from any act 
done or action taken under this Ch apter may make a lawsuit within 
two years from the date of the accrual of the cause of action.
275 
 
Chapter-2 
Provisions Relating to Formation of Contracts 
504. Contract deemed to be made:  (1) If an agreement enforceable by 
law is concluded between two or more persons to do or abstain from 
doing any act, a contract shall be deemed to be concluded.  
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), a contract shall be 
deemed to have been concluded once the person to whom an offer 
has been made by another pe rson communicates his or her 
acceptance thereto. 
(3) Once a contract is co ncluded, a binding legal 
relationship shall be created between the parties to it.  
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, 
(1) “Offer” means an offer ma de by one person to another 
person with the intent of obt aining his or her acceptance 
to do or abstain from doing any act. 
(2) “Acceptance” means the ac ceptance given by the person 
to whom the offer has been made in the same meaning 
in which the offer is made. 
505. Contract enforceable by law:  (1) A contract concluded in 
fulfillment of the following conditio ns shall be deemed to be a 
contract enforceable by law: 
(a) The consent expressed by a person to a contract to bind 
himself or herself, 
(b) Capacity or qualification of a person to a contract to 
conclude the contract,
276 
 
(c) Certain matter for the creation of an obligation, 
(d) Lawful obligation. 
(2) A contract may be made in  written or verbal form or 
even by conduct of the parties to it. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if 
there is a requirement that a par ticular contract be concluded in 
fulfillment of any particular procedure or formality, such a contract 
may not be enforceable unless such procedure or formality is completed.  
506. Persons competent to concluded contract:  (1) Every person other 
than the following persons shall be competent to conclude a contract: 
(a) One who is a minor, 
(b) One who is of unsound mind.  
Explanation: 
(1) A person who is usually  of unsound mind, but 
occasionally of sound mind, may conclude a contract 
when he or she is of sound mind. 
(2) A person who is usually of  sound mind, but occasionally 
of unsound mind, may not conc lude a contract when he 
or she is of unsound mind. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
any person who is deemed incomp etent to conclude a particular 
contract under the law shall not be  deemed to be a competent to 
conclude such a contract.
277 
 
(3)  In concluding a contract on behalf of a person who is 
incompetent or quasi-co mpetent, his or her guardian or curator may 
conclude such a contract. 
(4) In concluding a contract on  behalf of a legal person, it 
shall be conclude by a decision of the director or directors 
authorized for the management and operation of such a person or by 
a person authorized by such a director or directors. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, if a person deemed to be incompetent to conclude a contract 
under this Chapter on any particular matter is competent by other law 
to conclude a contract on such a matter, such a person shall be 
deemed to be competent to conclude a contract on that matter. 
507. Parties to be autonomous: The parties to a contract shall, subject to 
this Act, be autonomous to choose the form and contents of the 
contract, to determine terms and conditions of the contact and the 
nature of the remedy for its breach as well as to determine the 
measures for resolving disputes arising out of it. 
508. Offer and acceptance deem ed to be completed:  (1) Once the 
offeree comes to the knowledge of an offer, the act of making the 
offer shall be deemed to have been completed. 
(2) The act of giving acceptance shall be deemed to be 
completed, in case of the offerer, if the offerer receives the 
acceptance forwarded by the offeree to the offerer having indicated 
his or her acceptance to the offer, and in case of the offeree, if the 
offerer comes to know that the offeree has accepted the offer.
278 
 
(3) Even though there is no expression of  acceptance to the 
offer directly, if the offeree abid es by any terms mentioned in the 
offer by way of his or  her conduct or accepts  the advantage or 
service mentioned in the of fer or indicates acceptance  in any other 
manner, the offeree shall be d eemed to have accepted the offer.  
(4) If the offerer makes an offe r having stipul ated certain 
time and specifies that the offer is regarded as accepted if a notice 
of its rejection is not sent within such time, and if the offeree does 
not send a notice of acceptance of the offer within such time, the 
offer shall not be deemed to have been accepted. 
509. Offer or acceptance may be revoked : (1) The offerer may revoke 
his or her offer th rough a notice.  
Provided that, if th e offerer has received from the offeree a 
notice to the effect th at he or she has accep ted the offer before 
receiving a notice of revo cation of the offer, su ch an offer shall not 
be revoked.  
(2) The offeree may revoke his or  her acceptance by a notice.  
Provided that if the offerer ha s already received the notice of 
acceptance before receiving the noti ce of its revocation, such an 
acceptance shall not be revoked 
(3) The person who has sent a notice expressing his or her 
refusal of the offer may again se nd a notice expressing his or her 
acceptance to the offer. 
Provided that, if the notice of refusal out of the notices of 
refusal or acceptance reaches first, the contract sha ll not be deemed 
to have been conc luded, and if the notice of acceptance reaches first,
279 
 
the contract shall be deemed to be concluded.  
(4) If the notice under sub-sect ion (1) has been  sent after 
sending the offer, the notice unde r sub-section (2) has been sent 
after sending acceptance or the no tice under sub-section (3) has 
been sent after sendi ng a notice of refusal and the concerned person 
receives such noti ces at the same time, th e contract shall not be 
deemed to have been concluded.  
(5) If the offeree sends an acceptance with condition or 
with alteration to the offer sent by  the offerer, the offeree shall be 
deemed to after a counter offer. 
510. Offer deemed to be revoked: An offer shall be deemed to been 
revoked in any of the fo llowing circumstances:  
(a) If the offerer makes an offe r with a condition that a 
notice of acceptance to the o ffer be given within any 
certain time, and the offere r does not receive a notice 
of acceptance by the offer ee within that time,  
(b) If the time for sending a no tice of acceptance is not 
specified pursuant to clau se (a) and the offeree does 
not give a notice of acceptan ce to the offerer within a 
reasonable time, 
(c) If the offerer, after making th e offer, dies or becomes 
insane before receiving the acceptance, 
(d) If the offer is revoked pur suant to Section 509, 
(e) Even if the acceptance was gi ven by the offeree, the 
offeree dies or becomes in sane before the offerer 
receives the acceptance,
280 
 
(f) If the offeree sends a coun ter offer pursuant to sub-
section (5) of Section 509, 
(g) If the offerer makes an offe r on a condition that the 
offeree has to do any act or fulfill any condition before 
accepting the offer, and accep tance is made without 
doing such an act or fulfilling such a condition. 
511. Contract according to o ffer made before the public : (1) If a 
person makes an offer publicly by means of an advertisement that 
he or she will pay certain remunera tion to any person for doing any 
act specified in the advertisement,  and if any person does such an 
act, the advertiser sh all pay remuneration  specified in the 
advertisement to such a person. 
Provided that if a person does the act  specified in the 
advertisement without knowing such  advertisement,  such a person 
shall not be entitled to the remuneration. 
(2) If more than one person do the act specified  in the offer 
under sub-section (1), only the pe rson who does the act first shall 
be entitled to the remuneration. 
Provided that if two or more persons do the act specified in 
the offer at the same time, all of such persons shall be entitled to 
the equal share of the remunerati on, and if the remuneration is 
incapable of being sh ared, the proceeds of  the sale of the 
remuneration shall be e qually divided among them.  
(3) If a specific period is pr escribed for doing the act 
according to the advert isement published purs uant to sub-section 
(1), the offer made according to th e advertisement sh all be deemed
281 
 
to have been revoked immediately after the expiry of that period. 
 (4) An offer made pursuant to sub-section (1) may be 
revoked through the same medium through which it was published. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (4), 
if anyone has already done the act  specified in the advertisement 
under sub-section (1) before th e publication of the notice of 
revocation of the offer, the remuneration specified in the 
advertisement shall be provided. 
Provided that the person who does the act specified in the 
advertisement shall notify the adve rtiser of the co mpletion of the 
act as soon as possible.  
(6) If any person begins to do the act specified in the 
advertisement under sub-section (1 ) by giving its notice to the 
advertiser, appropriate remuneration shall be paid to such a person 
for the act done until the revo cation of the advertisement. 
512. Place of formatio n of contract:  (1) The place where the offerer 
sends an offer expecting to recei ve its acceptance shall be deemed 
to be the place of form ation of the contract. 
(2) If the place is not specified  pursuant to sub-section (1), 
the place where the offerer receives  acceptance shall be deemed to 
be the place of forma tion of the contract. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything c ontained in sub-sections (1) 
and (2), if the parties specify the place of its formation in the 
contract, such a place sh all be deemed to be the place of formation 
of the contract.
282 
 
513. Contingent contract:  (1) If a contract is c oncluded to do or not to 
do any act if some event happens in the future, such a contract shall 
create no obligation unti l such an event happens. 
(2) If a contract is so conclu ded as to be deemed to be 
concluded if any person does a par ticular act in th e future, such a 
contract shall creat e no obligation if such a person does anything by 
which he or she becomes unable or it becomes impossible for him 
or her to do such an act.  
(3) If a contract is concluded to  do or not to do any act if 
any uncertain event does not happen  in the future, the obligation 
under such a contract shall arise only after such an event becomes 
impossible to happen. 
(4) If a contract is concluded to  do or not to do any act if 
any event happens within any fixed time in the future, the contract 
shall be deemed to be void after such an event becomes impossible 
to happen within, or after th e expiry of, the fixed time. 
(5) If a contract is concluded to  do or not to do any act if 
any event does not happen within an y fixed time in the future, the 
obligation under such a contract shal l arise if such an  event does not 
happen or it becomes certain that  such an event will not happen 
within the fixed time. 
514. Application of  general provisions  of contract:  The provisions 
contained in this Chapte r and Chapters 3, 4 and 5 of this Part shall, 
generally, be applicable, to the other contracts to be concluded 
according to this Act or law.
283 
 
515. Interpretation of contract:  (1) A contract shall be interpreted 
according to the common inte ntion of its parties. 
(2) If the intention cannot be established pursuant to sub-
section (1), a contract shall be interpreted accordi ng to the meaning 
of general understanding that a reasonable  person of the same 
prudence as a party to the contract would gi ve to it in normal 
circumstances. 
(3) If one party to a contract knows or is deemed to know 
a statement and conduct of the othe r party, the contract shall be 
interpreted according to the in tention of such a party. 
(4) The terms and expressions us ed in a contract shall be 
interpreted in the light of the entire contract or the context in which 
such terms and expressions are used. 
(5) A contract shall be interpre ted in a manner  so that all 
the terms used in the contract ar e given effect wi thout separating 
some terms from others.  
516. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggr ieved from any act 
done or action taken under this Ch apter may file a lawsuit within 
two years after the date of th e accrual of the cause of action.
284 
 
Chapter-3 
Validity of Contracts 
517. Void contracts: (1) A contract which is not valid according to law 
shall be deemed to be a void contract.  
  (2) The following co ntracts shall be void: 
(a) A contract that restra ints anyone from exercising 
any profession, trade or business which is not 
prohibited by law, 
Provided that a cont ract shall not be 
deemed to be made in restraint of any profession, 
trade or business in any of the following 
circumstances: 
(1) Where a contract is concluded between a 
buyer and a seller on th e sale and purchase 
of the goodwill of any trade or business, 
the contract restraining the seller from 
carrying on similar tr ade or business under 
such goodwill for the time and at the place 
specified in such contract, 
(2) A contract concluded between the partners 
to restrain them from doing the same 
profession, trade or busi ness as that of the 
partnership firm or any other profession, 
trade or business together with other 
persons who are co mpetitors of the
285 
 
profession, trade or bu siness of the same 
nature other than the profession, trade or 
business of the partnership firm until the 
partnership exists, 
(3) A contract concluded between the partners 
restraining them fr om exercising a 
profession, trade or business of the 
partnership firm for a certain reasonable 
period or at a certa in place after being 
separated from the partnership, 
(4) A contract so concluded between a person 
and any person, firm , company or body 
that the person is restrained from 
accepting the service of  another person, 
firm, company or body who is the 
competitor of such other person, firm, 
company or body until th e person is in the 
service of, or for a sp ecified period after 
retirement from the se rvice of, such other 
person, firm, company or body. 
(b) A contract in restraint of a marriage other than 
one prohibited by the law, 
(c) A contract restraining any one from enjoying the 
facilities being enj oyed by the public,
286 
 
(d) A contract restraining le gal right of any person 
from being enforced by a court, 
(e) A contract concluded contrary to law or on a 
matter prohibited by the law in force, 
(f) A contract made for an immoral purpose or 
against public order or  public interest, 
(g) A contract which cannot be performed because 
the parties thereto do no t exactly ascertain or 
know about the matter in relation to which it has 
been concluded, 
(h) A contract the perfor mance of which is 
impossible at the time of its conclusion or a 
fictitious contract, 
(i) A contract which is vague because of its subject 
matter being incapable of  giving a reasonable 
meaning, 
(j) A contract concluded by a person not competent 
to make contract, 
(k) A contract with an  illegal purpose, 
(l) A contract concluded by mistake of both parties 
as to the essential fact of  the contract at the time 
of its conclusion.
287 
 
(3) A void contract is invalid ab initio  and it shall create 
neither any legal consequence nor any right and obligation of its 
parties. 
(4) Even if any part of a contract becomes void, its 
remaining parts shall be en forceable according to law. 
518. Voidable contracts : (1) A contract which, at  the initiation of its 
party, may be declared void by th e court shall be deemed to be a 
voidable contract. 
(2) The person aggrieved fr om any of the following 
contracts may get the cont ract voided by the court: 
(a) A contract concluded by coercion, 
Explanation: If a person detains or threatens to detain 
any property of another person  or threatens to put that 
other person's body, life or pr estige in peril or commits 
or threatens to commit any other act forbidden by law, 
with the intention of causing that other person to enter 
into a contract against his or her will, the person is said 
to commit coercion.  
(b) A contract concluded by undue influence, 
Explanation:  
(1) Undue influence means an  influence exercised 
by a person over another person who is under his 
or her influence or who may be employed 
according to his or her will  with the intention of
288 
 
taking any unfair advantage for his or her 
interest or concern.  
(2) Without prejudice to the ge nerality of clause (1), 
the following person is deemed to be under 
influence or who may be  employed according to 
his or will: 
(a) A person who is under his or her 
guardianship, curato rship or custody, 
(b) A person who is inca pable of representing 
his or her interest fo r the time being or 
forever by reason of age, illness or 
physical or mental distress, 
(c) A person who may be subjected to 
financial or positional influence of that 
other person. 
(c) A contract concluded by fraud, 
Explanation: A party to a contract or his or her agent 
is said to commit fraud when he or she, with intent to 
deceive another party thereto or his or her agent, makes 
the suggestion, as to  a fact, of that which is not true 
which he or she does  not believe it to  be true or does 
any act that is likely to make the other party or his or 
her agent believe it, or knowingly conceals a fact 
which is in his or her knowledge or does any such act 
as the law declares to be fraudulent.
289 
 
(d) A contract caused by misrepresentation. 
Explanation: Misrepresentation means any of the 
following acts: 
(1) Presenting a false descri ption of any matter or 
fact on without reasonable basis, 
(2) Misleading any party to his or her detriment, 
(3) Causing a mistake as to any matter of the 
contract, 
(4) Making assurance to have concluded a contract 
in one subject and but causi ng to enter into it in 
another subject.  
(3) In the case of a voidable co ntract under this Section, 
the following matters shall be governed as follows: 
(a) The party caused to enter in to a contract may, instead 
of having the contract void ed, demand that his or her 
position be restored  into the position  that would have 
been had the contract not been concluded.  
(b) If a contract is made with  the person who is under his 
or her influence and whose will can be dominated by 
him or her, the party who claims that he or she has not 
exercised such undue influen ce shall have the onus to 
prove that the contract ha s not been caused by undue 
influence.
290 
 
(4) A voidable contract sha ll, before it is voided, be 
enforceable as if it we re a lawful contract. 
(5) If a voidable co ntract under this S ection is voided by 
the court, it shall not af fect the act done under such contract before 
the voidance. 
(6) If any contract is voided pu rsuant to this Section, the 
legal right or interest of a bona  fide third party shall not be 
prejudiced merely by the r eason of such voidance.  
519. Unenforcea ble contracts:  (1) A contract that is not enforceable by 
the court shall be regarded as  an unenforceable contract. 
(2) Any of the following cont racts is not enforceable by 
the court in spite of its being concluded in fulf illment of the 
procedures under Chap ter-2 of this Part: 
(a)  A contract required to be made in written form 
according to law is not c oncluded in written form, 
(b) A contract required to be made in fulfillment of any 
particular formality or proc edure or to be  registered 
with any body according to law is not so made in 
fulfillment of such formality or procedure or is not so 
registered, 
(c) Where a contract is concluded on behalf of another 
person, the contract is concluded on a matter not 
authorized by, or concluded beyond the authority given 
by, that other person.
291 
 
520. Statute of  limitation: A person who is ag grieved from any act 
done or action taken under this Ch apter may make a lawsuit at any 
time, in the case of a void contract, within one year after the date of 
accrual of the cause of act ion for voidance, in th e case of a voidable 
contract, and within tw o years after the date of accrual of the cause 
of action, in the case of other contracts.
292 
 
Chapter-4 
Provisions Relating to P erformance of Contracts 
521. Obligation under co ntract to be fulfilled : Each party to a contract 
shall fulfill his or her ob ligation under the contract. 
522. Reciprocal perfor mance of contract : (1) If a contract is so 
concluded that the parties to the c ontract shall fulfil l their respective 
obligations simultaneously and one party demonstrates such 
conduct or intention that he or she is not willing to fulfill his or her 
obligation materially, the other pa rty need not perform his or her 
promise. 
(2) If the contract fixes the order of priority for the 
fulfillment of any promise, the pr omise shall be fu lfilled in that 
order, and failing the fixation of such an order, the party who is 
liable to perform the promise firs t according to the nature of the 
contract shall perform it first. 
(3) If, in the case of a cont ract containing reciprocal 
promises, and performance of one promise depends on the 
performance of the other promise, one party cannot perform the 
contract because of the failure of the other pa rty to perform his or 
her promise may recover the loss or  damage caused by the failure of 
the other party to perform the contract. 
(4) If a contract concluded for reciprocal promises to be 
simultaneously performed pursuant to sub-section (1 ) and one party 
prevents the other party from perf orming such a co ntract, the other 
party so prevented is entitled to rescind the contract and also to
293 
 
recover the loss or damage, if any, caused to him or her in 
consequence of such term ination of the contract. 
523. Time and manner for p erformance of contract : (1) If a contract 
specifies the time and manner for its  performance, the contract shall 
be performed within the specified ti me and in the specified manner.  
(2) If a contract does not speci fy the time or manner for 
the performance of an act under the contract but the act can be 
performed only at any specific tim e or only in a specific manner, 
the contract shall be d eemed to have been so concluded that the act 
has to be performed at that  time and in that manner. 
(3) If, except in th e circumstance under sub-section (2), a 
contract does not speci fy the time and manner for its performance, 
the contract shall be performed wi thin a reasonable time and in a 
reasonable manner. 
524. Place for perfor mance of contract: (1) If a contract specifies any 
particular place for the performance of any act, that act shall be 
performed at such a place.  
(2) If, any party is required by  a contract to hand over or 
deliver any goods to the other party and the contract does not 
specify the place for such hand-ove r or delivery of the goods, the 
contract shall be deemed to have been so concluded that the goods 
have to be delivered or handed over at the place where such goods 
are located. 
(3) If a contract does not spec ify a particular place for the 
performance of an act  but the act can be performed only at a 
particular place or has to be performed in any particular place
294 
 
having regard to practi ce or usage or nature of  the act, the contract 
shall be deemed to have been so concluded that the act has to be 
performed at that place. 
(4) In any case other than thos e referred to in sub-sections 
(2) and (3), if a co ntract does not speci fy the place for the 
performance of an act, the party performing the act  according to the 
contract shall notify th e other party to specify  a reasonable place for 
the performance of the act, and the other party shall specify a 
reasonable place for the performance of the act.  
525. Performance of contract deemed to be delayed:  (1) If a contract 
so made as to be performed at a particular time is not performed at 
or within such time, th e performance of contract  shall be deemed to 
have been be delayed. 
(2) If the contract under sub- section (1) can be performed 
even after such time, one  party of the contract may notify the other 
party to perform the contract, having given a reasonable time. 
(3) If a notice is given pursuant to sub-section (2), the 
other party shall perform the contract acco rdingly, and may claim 
for compensation for any loss or da mage caused in consequence of 
the delayed performance of the contract. 
(4) If a contract is not perfor med pursuant to sub-section 
(3), the party giving such a notice may rescind the contract. 
526. Time to be considered as  essence of contract: (1) If the the 
purpose or objective of a contract  cannot be achieved, in case of 
non-performance of the contract wi thin a particular day, time or 
period, having regard to the natu re of the contract or intention
295 
 
shown by the parties at time of its conclusion , the time for the 
performance of such a contract shal l be considered to  be the essence 
of the contract. 
(2) If either party of a c ontract does not perform the 
contract under sub-sec tion (1) within such a day, time or period, 
such a contract shall be  deemed to have been  breached and the other 
party may rescind the contract immediately. 
527. Circumstances where a contract  needs not be performed: In any 
of the following circumstances, it is not necessary to perform any 
act under, or perform, a contract: 
(a) If either party to a contract  waives the other party from 
fulfilling the obligation under the contract, 
(b) If a voidable contract is vo ided by the party entitled to 
do so,  
(c) If the contract cannot be pe rformed for the reason of its 
breach by the other party, 
(d) If it is not necessary to perform the act under the 
contract by operation of any provis ion of this Part, 
(e) If a contract which is unenforceable according to 
Section 531. 
528. Assignment of rights an d liabilities under a contract: If any 
party to a contract di es or becomes insane, the rights accruing from 
the contract shall devo lve on to the heir succeed ing the property of 
such a party to the contract, and the heir himself or herself shall 
also bear the obligati ons to the extent of the property  succeeded by 
him or her.
296 
 
Provided that the ri ghts and obligations accruing on the basis 
of personal skill and qualification shall not devolve on to such an 
heir.  
529. Party who must perform contract: (1) Except in cases where a 
contract specifies that  it must be performe d by its party only, the 
contract may be performed by hi s or her agent or by a person 
appointed by him or her or by any ot her person on his or her behalf 
or the rights and obligations under the contract may be transferred.  
Provided that no part y to a contract may transfer his or her 
obligations under the contract to another person without consent of 
the other party. 
(2) The following terms and cond itions shall be fulfilled in 
order to transfer rights  and obligations under a contract pursuant to 
sub-section (1): 
(a) Unless the contract othe rwise provides for, the 
transfer shall be in written form, 
(b) The transfer shall be unconditional, 
(c) The transfer of rights or obligations is not 
prohibited by law or  the contract,  
(d) In the case of the transfer of rights and obligations, 
a notice along with its time limit shall be given to 
the other party.  
(3) Once any party to a contr act accepts any act done by a 
third person, that party shall not be entitled to claim subsequently 
that the act must be done by the party to the cont ract himself or 
herself, except as otherwise pr ovided for in the contract.
297 
 
(4) If two or more persons jointl y enter into a contract with 
another party, any or all of such joint promisors shall fulfill, or 
cause to be fulfilled,  the obligations under th e contract, except as 
otherwise provided fo r in the contract. 
(5) The joint promisor who fulf ills the obligation shall be 
entitled to recover damages or loss on a pro rata  basis from the 
other joint promisors, in consider ation for the default of any other 
joint promisor in the fulfillment of the obligation under sub-section 
(4). 
(6) Even if one party releases  one joint promisor of the 
other party to the contract conclude d pursuant to in sub-section (4) 
from the obligation on his or he r part, such release shall not 
discharge the other joint promisor s from the obligation under that 
contract. 
530. Only the parties to  contract can dema nd its performance : (1) 
Only the person who is a part y to a contract  can demand the 
performance of the contract by the other party. 
Provided that if a co ntract is concluded fo r the benefit of any 
person, such a person can demand th e performance of that contract 
even if he or sh e is not a party to  such a contract. 
(2) If two or more persons jointly enter into contract to do 
or not to do any act, all such a persons can jointly demand the 
performance of that contract, excep t as otherwise provided for in 
the contract. 
531. Discharge of contract s in the event of fu ndamental changes in 
circumstances: (1) If it becomes impossible to perform a contract
298 
 
as a result of fu ndamental change in the ci rcumstance existed at the 
time of conclusion of the contract, the act acco rding to the contract 
need not be performed.  
(2) Without prejudice to the ge nerality of su b-section (1), 
emergence of any of th e following circumstan ces shall be deemed 
to constitute a fundamental change  in the circumstance existed at 
the time of conclu sion of a contract: 
(a) If the contract becomes ille gal and thereby it cannot be 
performed, 
(b) If it becomes impossible to perform the contract due to 
emergence of situations beyo nd human control such as 
war, flood, landslide, fire , earthquake and volcanic 
eruption, 
(c) If the subject matter essen tial for the performance of 
the contract is destroyed or  damaged, or exists no 
longer, or such a subject matter could not be obtained, 
(d) If the contract is so c oncluded that its performance 
depends on the personal ability, skill or talent of a 
person, and the performance of the contract becomes 
impossible by the reason that  such a person dies or 
becomes insane or is in capable of performing the 
contract because of  physical or mental disability. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (2), 
none of the following circumstances shall be deemed to constitute a 
fundamental change in the circ umstance existed at the time of 
conclusion of a contract:
299 
 
 (a) If the performance of the co ntract has become difficult, 
(b) If the performance of the contract resu lts in less profit 
or in loss, 
(c) If any party to the contract  is dependent upon any third 
party who is not a party to the contr act for its 
performance, and the third party makes a default or 
becomes incompetent, 
(d) In the event of a strike or lockout, 
(e) If additional tax, fee or ot her revenue is required to be 
paid, 
(f) If a contract is conclude d with more th an one object 
and some of the objects cannot be fulfilled. 
(4) In the case of emergence of any of the circumstances 
referred to in sub-section (3), th e parties may, except as otherwise 
provided for in th e contract, negoti ate to review or  alter the terms 
and conditions of  the contract. 
(5) If the performance of a co ntract becomes impossible by 
the reason of a fundame ntal change in the ci rcumstance as referred 
to in sub-section (2), the followi ng matters shall be governed as 
follows: 
(a) A party who has received an y amount paid by the other 
party in consideration of the contract, prior to the 
occurrence of such a change in the circumstance, shall 
refund it to the other party,
300 
 
(b) Payment to be made or due from one party to the other 
party in consideration of the contract shall not be 
payable after such a chan ge in the circumstance. 
(c) The amount payable to each other shall be  determined 
in consideration the act or amount already performed 
or paid, if any, by one part y to the other party before 
such a change in the circum stance, and one party shall 
be entitled to reco ver reasonable expenses incurred by 
that party in consideration of the contract from the 
other party. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, the contracting parties ma y agree to fulfill  their respective 
obligations by continuing the performance of the contract after the 
end of the circumstance under cl ause (b) of sub-section (2). 
532. Facilities to be provided: (1) The parties to a contract shall 
provide to each other such faciliti es as may be n eeded to perform 
the contract from th eir respective sides.  
(2) If the contract cannot be pe rformed due to the failure to 
provide such facilities, the party in default of the performance shall 
not be held liable responsible. 
533. Contract may be suspended or altered: (1) The parties to a 
contract may, if they so agree, change or al ter all or any of the 
portions of the act to be perfor med under the contract, extend the 
time for the performance of any act under the contract, suspend the 
contract by not making  it obligatory to pe rform any act to be 
performed under the contract for some time, substitute any act for
301 
 
the act specified in the contract or make a new contract in 
substitution for the original contract.  
(2) If any change or alteratio n is made to a contract 
pursuant to sub-section (1), a new contract shall be  deemed to be 
made, and the new contract sha ll become effective accordingly. 
(3) If a new contract is made pursuant to sub-section (2), 
the obligation under the original co ntract need not be borne except 
as otherwise provided fo r in the new contract. 
534. Statute of limitation:  A person who is aggrieved from any act 
done or action taken under this Ch apter may make a lawsuit within 
two years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.
302 
 
Chapter-5 
Provisions Relating to Breach of Contract and Remedies 
535. Breach of contract deemed to occur : (1) If any party to a contract 
fails to fulfill the obligation under the contract or gives a notice to 
the other party that he or she will not perform the act to be 
performed by him or her under the contract or his or her action and 
conduct demonstrate that he or sh e is incapable of performing the 
act under the contract, the party shall be deem ed to have breached 
the contract. 
(2) If one party commits a breach  of the contract pursuant 
to sub-section (1) or action or co nduct of that party demonstrates 
non-performance of the contract  in a material respect or 
demonstrates a material breach of  the contract by  the conduct or 
action of a party, the other party may rescind the contract by giving 
a notice to such a party. 
(3) In the case of the rescission  of the contract pursuant to 
sub-section (2), the party rescindi ng the contract shall not be bound 
to perform the contract. 
536. Indivisible nature of the authority to res cind contract:  If either 
party of a contract consists of tw o or more persons, the contract 
may be rescinded only if all of such persons rescind it or if the 
rescission is applicab le to all of them. 
537. Compensation for breach of contract: (1) In the case of breach of 
a contract under Sectio n 535, the party aggrieved by it shall be 
entitled to recover from the party in  breach of the contract damages 
for the actual loss or damage cause d by the breach or such loss or
303 
 
damage which the contracting part ies knew when they made the 
contract to be likely result from the breach.  
(2) If the parties to a contract , in anticipation, at the time 
of its formation specify a sum in the contract, which becomes 
payable for breach of the contract , the aggrieved party shall be 
entitled to recover a reasonable amount not in excess of that sum 
from the other party, pursuant to sub-section (1).  
(3) If the contract does not  provide for compensation 
referred to in sub-se ction (2), the party cl aiming such compensation 
shall be entitled to recover a r easonable amount fo r the direct and 
actual loss or damage re sulted from the breach of  contract or for the 
breach of contract or  for compensation.  
Provided that no co mpensation may be recovered for any 
indirect or remote loss or damage. 
(4) If a contract, which is concluded for the completion of 
any act within a fixed period, contains a provision that 
compensation as referred to in sub- section (2) is payable if such an 
act cannot be completed within th at period, the party paying such 
compensation may request for the extension of the period for the 
completion of the co ntract in proportion to the amount of 
compensation paid by him or her. 
(5) The right of a party to a contract to seek other legal 
remedies for the breach of a contract shall not be deemed adversely 
affected merely by the reason that  the amount of compensation has 
been paid pursuant to this Section.
304 
 
538. Consequences of resciss ion or voidance of contract: (1) If, after a 
party to a contract has already r eceived some cash or kind or any 
other benefit from the other party or after the fulfillment of the 
obligations under the contract partia lly, the contract is rescinded by 
mutual consent of the parties and th e performance of the contract is 
not required under this Part or othe r law, the contract is voided or 
declared to be void according to  law or the contract becomes 
invalid or is rescinded under this Pa rt, such cash, kind  or service so 
received shall be returned upon having settled th e accounts of the 
cash or kind given until the date of  the contract being in force.  
(2) If any service or advantage other than cash or kind has 
been given pursuant to sub-section (1), the party receiving such 
service or advantage shall pay a reasonable amount to the other 
party in consideration for such service or benefit. 
(3) If it becomes necessary to  institute lega l action by the 
reason of failure to re turn the cash or kind or  to pay the amount as 
referred to in sub-sec tion (1), a reasonable e xpense incurred for that 
purpose may also be recovered. 
539. Amount to be recovered in prop ortion to performed contract 
(quantum meruit): If a contract is rescinde d by the reason of its 
breach by any party or  for any other reason,  the aggrieved party 
may claim for the payment by the other party of amount under the 
contract in proporti on to the work done or  the performance of 
contract made by that party.  
540. Specific performance of contract:  (1) If monetary compensation 
is not reasonable and adequate  for the actual loss or damage 
suffered by the aggrieve d party because of th e breach of contract,
305 
 
the aggrieved party may claim for the specific perf ormance of the 
contract instead of compensation. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
specific performance may not be cl aimed in any of the following 
circumstances: 
(a)  If monetary compensati on is an adequate remedy 
for the breach of contract, 
(b)  If the court cannot superv ise the performance of the 
act under the contract, 
(c)  If the contract is for pr oviding services of personal 
ability, skill or knowledge, 
(d)  If the contract cannot specifically be performed, 
(e)  If the party in breach of the contract claims for its 
specific performance. 
541. Power of court to make order: (1) If the performance of a contract 
is not possible because any party to the contract is about to perform 
any act or conduct which is contrary  to the nature of the contract, 
the party aggrieved by such an action or a conduct may file a 
complaint in the court to prev ent such an act or conduct.  
(2) If a complaint is filed purs uant to sub-section (1), the 
court may issue an appr opriate order to any party to immediately 
stop his or her particular action or conduct, subject to the settlement 
of the dispute arising out  of that contract in  accordance with such a 
contract or law.
306 
 
(3) If an order is issued purs uant to sub-section (1), the 
aggrieved party shall be entitled to  also recover additional loss or 
damage caused from the failure of  the other party to comply with 
the order so issued. 
542. Compensation to be ascert ained in monetary value:  Except as 
otherwise provided for in the contract, assessm ent of compensation 
for any loss or damage as referr ed to in this Chapter shall be 
ascertained in monetary value. 
Provided that Sect ion 540 shall apply to the remedy under 
that Section.  
543. Power of  court to consider matters:  While determining 
compensation arising fro m the breach of a cont ract, the court shall 
consider matters incl uding whether the pa rty has breached the 
contract intentionally  or whether the non-per formance has occurred 
due to recklessness and how much  money or benefit might have 
been received by the i nnocent party to the cont ract had the contract 
not been breached. 
544. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrie ved from an act done 
or action taken under this Chapte r may make a lawsuit within two 
years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.
307 
 
Chapter-6 
Provisions Relating to Contract of Sale of Goods  
545. Contract of sale of goods: (1) A contract of sale of goods shall be 
deemed to have been made if any seller agrees to transfer the 
property in goods immediately or in the future to the buyer for a 
price. 
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter, the term 
“goods” means any kind of mova ble property capable of being 
purchased or sold other than curr ency in circulat ion for the time 
being, security or actionable claim. 
(2) A contract of sale of goods may be conditional or 
unconditional. 
(3) A contract may be conclu ded to sell the goods owned 
or possessed by the seller for the tim e being or those to be produced 
or acquired by the seller in the future. 
546. Contract of sale of goods to be void: If a contract is concluded to 
sell any specific type of goods , which have already become 
damaged at the time of or before  making of the contract, and the 
seller is not aware about that at the time of ma king of the contract, 
the contract shall be void. 
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Section, the term 
“specific type of goods” means th e specific goods me ntioned in the 
contract at the time of making of the contract. 
547. Determining price of goods : (1) Except as othe rwise provided for 
in the contract, the pri ce of goods shall be de termined in the manner
308 
 
agreed upon in the cont ract under the terms and conditions of the 
contract, or by the course of dealing be tween the parties. 
(2) If the price of goods is determined according to their 
weight and measurement, the price of goods shall be determined on 
the basis of the net weight and measurement of su ch goods, except 
as otherwise provided for in the contract. 
(3) If the price of goods canno t be determined under sub-
section (1) or (2), the buyer shall pay the seller  a reasonable price, 
taking into account the relevant circumstances. 
548. Payment of price of goods: (1) Except as otherw ise provided for in 
the contract, the price of  goods shall be paid as follows in any of 
the following circumstances: 
(a)  The price of goods to be  paid by the buyer to the 
seller, at the time of th e purchase of goods by the 
buyer, 
(b)  At the time of the transfer of the goods. 
(2) While making payment of the price of goods pursuant 
to sub-section (1), it shall be paid in cash. 
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Section, the term 
“cash” includes a cheque , traveler's cheque, pr omissory note, bill of 
exchange, letter of credit, bank dr aft, credit card and telegraphic 
transfer, payable through bank. 
549. Description of goods: (1) If a contract specifi es the name, brand, 
trademark or specification of any goods to be sold, the contract 
shall be deemed to have been c oncluded for the sale of the goods 
corresponding to that name, br and, trademark or specification.
309 
 
(2) If a contract specifies th e name, brand, trademark or 
specification and the sample of good s to be sold, the bulk of such 
goods shall correspond no t only to the sample but also to the name, 
brand, trademark or specification specified  in the contract. 
550. Condition as to title to goods to be sold : (1) Except as otherwise 
provided for in the cont ract, it shall be deemed  that, in the case of a 
sale of goods, the seller has the title to the goods sold  or, in the case 
of an agreement to sell the goods in  the future, the seller has or will 
have the title to the goods to be sold, and that su ch goods are free 
from custody, control or po ssession by any other person. 
(2) Except as otherwise provid ed for in the contract, the 
seller shall be deemed to have the ri ght to sell the goods sold or to 
be sold. 
551. Condition as to  quality of goods: (1) Except as otherwise provided 
for in the contract, the goods sold or to be so ld shall be deemed to 
be of satisfactory quality.  
(2) If any goods sold or to be sold for any particular 
purpose are fit for that purpose, the goods sold or to be sold shall be 
considered to be of satisfactory quality. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (2), 
if the contract itself specifies any defects of such goods or if the 
buyer has already knew such defect s before the conclusion of the 
contract or while inspecting th e goods, such good s shall not be 
deemed to be of uns atisfactory quality. 
(4) If the quality of any particul ar goods is sp ecified in the 
contract, the goods  shall correspond to th at quality, and if no
310 
 
quality is so specified, the goods shall be of the quality according to 
the prevalent standards. 
(5) Except as otherwise provid ed for in the contract, the 
seller shall not be deemed  to have warranted th at the goods sold or 
to be sold are of a particular quality. 
552. Right to accept or reject  goods of different quantity: (1) If the 
seller tenders to deliver to the bu yer the goods of different quality 
than that specifi ed in the contr act, the buyer has the right to accept 
and take delivery of the goods in whole, to reject the whole or to 
accept any part and reject the rest of the goods.  
(2) If any goods are rejected in whole or in part pursuant to 
sub-section (1), the buyer may give  a notice to the seller to either 
deliver other goods instead of such  goods or where the quality of 
such goods could be improved, to improve the quality of such 
goods. 
(3) If a notice is given pursuant to sub-section (2), the 
seller shall deliver the other goods instead of such goods or improve 
the quality thereof, according to the notice given by  the buyer or 
mutual understanding reached between them. 
553. Deemed to be contract  for sale by sample: (1) If a provision has 
been made in a contract to se ll goods upon insp ection of their 
samples directly or indirectly a cont ract of sale of goods is deemed 
to be a contract for the sale of goods upon in specting sample.  
(2) If a contract is conclude d for the sale of goods by 
sample, the contract shall be d eemed to contain the following 
conditions, except as otherwise provided for in the contract:
311 
 
(a) The bulk of the goods shall correspond to the 
sample in quality, 
(b) The buyer shall have a reasonable opportunity of 
comparing the quality of the bulk of the goods 
with the sample, 
(c) The goods sold or to be sold shall be free from 
any defect, and such goo ds appear to be of 
satisfactory quality, appa rent on comparing them 
with the sample. 
554. Provisions relating to transf er of ownership of goods : (1) If there 
is a contract for the sale of an y specific or ce rtain goods, the 
transfer of such goods sh all be made as provided  for in the contract, 
and failing such provision in the co ntract, the transfer  shall be made 
according to the terms and conditions  of the contract , intention of 
the parties, ascertained by having regard the conduct of the parties, 
and the relevant circumstances.  
(2) Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, if a 
contract is concluded for the sa le of any specific goods in a 
deliverable state, the parties shall be deemed to have the intention 
of transferring them when the contract is  concluded or upon 
payment of the pric e of the goods. 
(3) If a contract is concluded for the sale of any specific 
goods in a deliverable state and th e buyer has to take measurement, 
weight, make examinatio n of the goods or to perform some acts to 
determine the price of such goo ds, such goods shall not be
312 
 
transferred until the buyer performs  such acts and gives information 
thereof to the buyer with in a reasonable time. 
(4) Except as otherwise provid ed for in th e contract, a 
contract shall be deemed to have been concluded so that the goods 
sold or to be sold shall be tran sferred in the place where such goods 
are situated. 
(5) Except as otherwise provid ed for in the contract, the 
buyer shall be deemed to have the title or ownership of the goods at 
the time of the tr ansfer of the good s to the buyer. 
555. To bear risks: (1) Except as otherwise prov ided for in the contract, 
the seller shall bear the risk of any loss or da mage to the goods until 
such goods are transf erred to the buyer. 
(2) If the transfer of goods has been delayed due to the 
fault of either the buyer  or the seller, the pa rty who has caused such 
delay shall bear the risk  of loss or damage under sub-section (1). 
(3) If the seller agrees to de liver the goods from the place 
of purchase to the place specified by the buyer, the seller shall bear 
the risk of any loss or damage to the go ods, except as otherwise 
provided for in the contract. 
556. Right of buyer to ascertain goods: If the delivery of the goods 
sold is tendered to the buyer, th e buyer shall have a reasonable 
opportunity to examin e and ascertain whethe r or not the goods 
conform to the contract and the buyer shal l not be deemed to have 
been accepted the deliver y of the goods until th e buyer so ascertains.  
557. Goods deemed to be accepted: The buyer shall be deemed to have 
accepted the goods in any of the following circumstances:
313 
 
(a) If the buyer or his or her agent receives the goods, 
(b) If a receipt or slip is issued having acknowledged the 
delivery of the goods, 
(c) If the buyer stores th e goods having ascertained, 
pursuant to Section 556, that the goods conform to the 
contract, 
(d) If the goods reach the b uyer and the b uyer does not 
inform the seller within reas onable time that he or she 
has rejected the goods and retains the goods with him 
or her.  
(e) If the buyer does any act pr oving that he or she has 
ownership in and control over such goods. 
558. Time for delivery of goods : (1) If the co ntract provides  that goods 
have to be delivered at any speci fic time or with in any specified 
period, the seller shall deliver the g oods to the buyer at that time or 
within that period. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if the buyer accepts the goods delivered by the sell er before or after 
the time or period speci fied in the contract , the seller shall be 
deemed to have delivered the goods. 
559. Documents concernin g sold goods to be handed over : Except as 
otherwise provided for in the contract, the goods are delivered but 
such basic documents as  are related to the ownership of the goods 
or required for their use are not ha nded over, the ownership of the 
goods shall not be deemed to  have been transferred.
314 
 
560. Not to  deliver of goods in quantity  different from quantity 
specified in contract: (1) If the seller deli vers to the buyer a 
quantity of goods less than the quan tity specified in the contract, the 
buyer may reject the goods.  
Provided that if th e buyer accepts the g oods even in such 
quantity, the buyer shall pay the pri ce of that quant ity at the rate 
specified in the contract. 
(2) If the seller delivers to the buyer a quantity of goods 
larger than the quantit y specified in the contract, the buyer may 
accept the goods only in the quantity specified  in the contract, and 
reject the rest or the whole quantity of goods. 
Provided that if the buyer a ccepts the whole quantity of 
goods so delivered, the buyer shal l pay for the whol e at the rate 
specified in the contract. 
(3) If the seller delivers to  the buyer the goods mixed with 
goods of a description different th an specified in the contract, the 
buyer may accept the goods specified in the contract and reject the 
rest or the goods in whole. 
(4) Except as otherwise provid ed for in the contract, the 
buyer shall not be b ound to accept the deli very of goods in 
installments. 
(5) Except as otherwise provided  for in the contract, if the 
buyer rejects the goods tendered by the seller for delivery, the buyer 
shall not be bound to retu rn them to the seller.
315 
 
Provided that th e buyer shall give  a notice of rejection, along 
with the reason for the same, to th e seller through fastest means of 
communication. 
561. Special provisions relating to compensation : Notwithstanding 
anything contained else where in this Part, th e following provisions 
shall apply to compensa tion for a contract under this Chapter: 
(a) If the buyer does not accept or rejects the goods or 
refuses to pay the price of the goods after the making 
of a contract of the sale  of goods, the seller may, 
subject to the contract, cl aim compensation from the 
buyer in consideration of th e buyer's failure to accept 
or refusal to accept the goods, 
(b) While determining compensa tion under clause (a), if 
the goods which the buyer has not accepted or has 
refused to accept are ava ilable in the market, 
compensation shall be determ ined on the basis of the 
difference between the price of the goods specified in 
the contract and the market or prevalent price of the 
goods, 
(c) If the seller does not deli ver or refuses to deliver the 
goods according to the contract  for the sale of goods, 
the buyer may clai m compensation from the seller for 
his or her failure to deliver the goods, 
(d) While determining compensa tion under clause (c), if 
the goods which the seller has refused or failed to 
deliver to the buyer are available in the market,
316 
 
compensation shall be determined on the basis of 
difference between the price of the goods specified in 
the contract and the market or prevalent price of the 
goods. 
562. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggr ieved from any act 
done or action taken under this Ch apter may make a lawsuit within 
two years after the date of th e accrual of the cause of action.
317 
 
Chapter-7 
Provisions Relating to Contracts of Guarantee 
563. Contract of guaran tee deemed to be made : (1) If a contract is 
concluded under which a third part y undertakes to repay the loan 
borrowed by or discharge the liab ility promised by a person in case 
of that person's default, a contract  of guarantee shall be deemed to 
be concluded.  
(2) If a third party gives the guarantee pursuant to sub-
section (1) and the person bound to repay the loan or discharge the 
liability fails to repay or discharge such loan or liability, the person 
giving the guarantee (the surety) to such loan or liability shall repay 
the loan or discharge the liabi lity according to the terms and 
conditions of the contract. 
(3) The terms and conditions of guarantee shall be as 
determined in the contract. 
(4) A contract of guarantee sh all be made in written form. 
564. Surety's obligation : (1) Except as otherwise provided for in the 
contract, the surety's obli gation shall be as follows: 
(a) Obligation of the surety shal l arise at the time when the 
debtor fails to discharge the obligation to be discharged 
by him or her. 
(b) Obligation of the surety sh all be the same as the 
obligation of the debtor who has to repay the loan or 
discharge the obligation, and the surety shall remain
318 
 
liable until the debt or becomes free from  the obligation 
to repay or discharge.  
(c) Obligation of the surety shall not be discharged merely 
because the principal debt or becomes free from the 
obligation by operation of law. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if both security and guarantee ha ve been given for any loan or 
obligation, the surety shall not be liable to the extent covered by the 
security so provided. 
(3) A contract of guarantee sh all be effective immediately 
when the principal debt or breaches the obligation of repayment or 
discharging liability to the credit or, and the credito r may cause the 
surety to discharge such liability. 
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Part, the term 
“creditor” means a person who has lent a loan, and also includes a 
person who is entitled to obtain any benefit from, or have any act 
done, by the person who is bound to repay the loan or  discharge the 
liability. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (3), 
the creditor shall give a notice to the principal debtor to perform the 
contract according to its terms and conditions before claiming the 
surety under the contract of gua rantee for the repayment of the 
amount not paid or discharge of the liability not discharged 
according to the contract.
319 
 
565. When surety is in discharge from obligation: (1) Except as 
otherwise provided for in the contract, the surety shall be in 
discharge of his or her obligation to  the following extent, in any of 
the following circumstances: 
(a) If the principal debtor so alters the terms and 
conditions of the contract without the surety's consent 
as to have substantial impact  on the contract, in respect 
of the transactio ns subsequent to the alteration, 
(b) If a contract is concluded to discharge the principal 
debtor from the obligation for which the guarantee was 
given, 
(c) If the principal debtor is discharged from the obligation 
by an act or action of the cred itor or the lo an is written 
off, 
(d) If the creditor agrees to discharge the debtor from the 
liability by recovering a sum le ss than that is due or to 
give additional time for repa ying the loan or not to 
institute a lawsuit, 
(e) If any act or action by the creditor causes an adverse 
impact to the surety's right  to legal remedy against the 
principal debtor,  
(f) If the creditor loses, dama ges any security obtained by 
him or her from the principal debtor or returns it to the 
principal debtor, to the extent of the value of such 
security,
320 
 
(g) To the extent to which the principal debtor has repaid 
the loan or discha rged the obligation to the creditor 
according to the contract. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
the surety shall not be  deemed to be in discharge of obligation, 
except as otherwise prov ided in the contract , merely because the 
creditor fails to institute legal actio n against the surety or attempt to 
recover the amount to be rec overed by him or her in time. 
(3) If there are two or more  sureties and the creditor 
discharges one co-surety from obli gation, the other co-sureties shall 
not be discharged from their respective part of obligation. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (3), 
if the part of the co-sureties' obl igation cannot be separated, no co-
surety shall be deemed to be in discharge of his or her obligation 
even though the creditor has discharged him or her from the 
obligation. 
(5) Except as otherwise provid ed for in the contract, the 
surety shall not be in discharge of  obligation under the contract of 
guarantee merely because there aris es a dispute between the parties 
in relation to the contract creati ng the obligation for the discharge 
of which the contract of  guarantee is made.  
566. Relation between the suret y and the principal debtor : (1) The 
surety shall cause the principal debt or to repay the lo an or discharge 
the obligation accordin g to the contract.
321 
 
(2) If the principal debtor has given any property or 
security to the surety for the gua rantee given by him or her while 
borrowing a loan or promising the obligation, the surety shall not 
pledge, mortgage, sell or otherw ise transfer the title to such 
property or security without the consent of the principal debtor. 
(3) If a guarantee is given for any loan or obligation 
borrowed or promised for any speci fic purpose, the ob ject, nature or 
terms and conditions of that loan or obligati on shall not be altered 
without the consent of the surety. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, if the contract otherwise pr ovides in relation to the surety 
and the principal debtor, such pr ovision shall be applicable.  
567. Surety to su bstitute creditor : (1) After the surety has, on behalf of 
the principal debtor, repaid the loan  to be repaid or discharged the 
obligation to be discharged to th e creditor under the contract, the 
surety shall substitute the creditor in relation to such loan or 
obligation, and, as the creditor, be  entitled to recove r the loan from, 
or institute legal action agai nst, the principal debtor. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Chapter, the principal de btor shall pay to the surety the sum of loan 
repaid by the surety or all am ounts in consideration for the 
obligation performed by the surety on  behalf of the principal debtor, 
as well as interest or any other f ee or amount char geable thereon. 
(3) If it becomes necessary to institute legal action because 
of the default of the principal de btor to pay the amount payable by
322 
 
him or her under sub-section (2) or if any other expenses need to be 
incurred in this regard, the surety shall be entitled to recover also 
such expenses from the principal debtor. 
568. When contract of guarantee can be voided: In any of the 
following circumstances, the sure ty may have the contract of 
guarantee voided:  
(a) If the guarantee is obtained by the creditor  or by any 
other person with his or her consent by supplying 
misleading or false notice or information to the surety 
about the matter of the tr ansaction for which the 
guarantee is given, 
(b) If the matter of guarantee, prop erty or fact is concealed 
or not disclosed, 
(c) If the contract is concluded on the condition that a third 
person will also become th e surety but the third person 
does not consent to gi ve the guarantee. 
569. Obligation of suret ies to be equal:  (1) If two or more persons give 
the guarantee jointly or severally fo r any loan or obligation and the 
principal debtor fails to repay the loan or discharge the obligation, 
the co-sureties shall repay the loan  or discharge the obligation or 
perform the contract on an e qual basis, except as otherwise 
provided for in the contract. 
(2) If, while giving the guaran tee jointly pursuant to sub-
section (1), the co-sureties guarant ee different parts, every surety
323 
 
shall be liable to pay or bear the ob ligation only to the extent of the 
respective part guarant eed by him or her. 
570. Continuous guarantee: (1) A guarantee which is so given as to 
extend to a series of transactions shall be deemed to  be a continuous 
guarantee. 
(2) If the provision of a guar antee referred to in sub-
section (1) is made, the surety shall be liable to the extent of the 
amount of guarantee that could not be  recovered in the entire period 
of the contract of guarantee irrespective of the number of 
transactions made thereunder. 
(3) The surety may, by giving a notice to the creditor at 
least three months in advance, revoke the continuous guarantee as 
to the future transactions. 
(4) Except as otherwise provided  for in the contract, if the 
surety dies, the cont inuous guarantee shall be deemed to be ipso 
facto revoked. 
571. Contract of indemnity d eemed to be concluded : (1) If a contract 
is concluded by which one party to  the contract promises to save 
the other from loss or damage cau sed to him or her by the conduct 
of the promisor himself or hersel f or by the conduct of any other 
person working under the directio n of such a party or loss or 
damage caused to such a party or third party by hi s or her conduct, 
the contract shall de emed to be a cont ract of indemnity.
324 
 
(2) If a contract referred to in sub-section (1) is concluded, 
the indemnity holder shall be enti tled to recover as compensation 
all or any of the following amount s, subject to that contract: 
(a) The amount of indemnity specified in the contract, 
(b)  If any loss or damage is caused to a third person, the 
amount to be paid to or borne therefor, 
(c)  All costs paid in any suit, if any, filed or defended by 
him or her in connection with the contract of 
indemnity, 
(d)  The costs involv ed in any suit compelled to be made 
due to failure to pay the amo unts referred to in clause 
(a), (b) or (c). 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (2), 
if the other party or third party su ffers any loss or damage due to 
any act done by any person under th e direction of such a party when 
such an act is done knowingly or r ecklessly by that person, with the 
intention of causing such loss or  damage, such a person shall 
personally be liable for such loss or damage. 
572. Provisions relat ing to subrogation : (1) If any person concludes a 
contract with another person against any poss ible loss or damage 
that could be caused by a third person  to his or her pr operty, facility 
or right enjoyed by him or her or be nefit that could result from his 
or her business, the person conclu ding such a cont ract shall be 
liable for such loss or damage irrespective of the person causing 
such loss or damage.
325 
 
Provided that if a contract is  concluded to recover such loss 
or damage from any other person, it shall be recovered from such 
other person. 
(2) The amount or compensation , if any, speci fied in the 
contract for any loss or damage su ffered pursuant to sub-section (1) 
and a reasonable amount or compensation, failing such 
specification, shall be pa id, or caused to be paid, immediately to the 
person affected by the loss or damage  or to his or her successor if 
he or she is dead. 
(3) If any loss or damage is suffered pursuant to sub-
section (1), the person  paying the amount or  compensation referred 
to in sub-section (2) shall be deemed to ha ve subrogated the person 
who has sustained such loss or  damage, and accordingly, the 
subrogator shall be en titled to the recovery  of the amount or 
compensation for su ch loss or damage from the person causing such 
loss or damage. 
573. Rights of subrogator : The rights and obligation of the subrogator 
shall be as specified in  the contract, and, fai ling such specification, 
shall be as follows: 
(a) All the rights, under the contract, of the person who 
has sustained the loss or damage shall devolve on the 
subrogator, 
(b) The subrogator under clau se (a) may recover from the 
person who has caused the lo ss or damage, or from the 
party to a contract concluded in that respect , if any, the
326 
 
amount or reasonable compen sation paid by him or her 
to the person who has suffer ed the loss or damage, as 
well as the costs incurred in  having recourse to legal 
remedies, if any. 
574. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggr ieved from any act 
done or action taken under this Ch apter may file a lawsuit within 
two years after the date of th e accrual of the cause of action.
327 
 
Chapter-8 
Provisions Relating to Contracts of Bailment 
575. Contract of bailment:  (1) If a person so delivers any goods to 
another person that the goods shall be returned to him or her or 
handed over or sold  to any other person  according his or her 
direction, a contract of bailment shall be deemed to have been 
concluded. 
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter, the term 
“goods” means any mova ble property and righ t in such property, 
other than currency  in circulation. 
(2) In concluding a contract pursuant to sub- section (1), a 
deed shall be executed while bai ling any property the price of 
which exceeds twenty-f ive thousand rupees. 
576. Bailment deemed to  be completed : (1) The process of bailment 
shall be deemed to be complete d once the bailee takes the delivery 
of the goods under bailment. 
(2) If any person or any one authorized by him or her has 
already taken any goods in custody or possession, su ch goods shall 
be deemed to have been held as bailment. 
577. To disclose faults in  goods bailed: (1) The bailor shall disclose to 
the bailee any fault in the goods bail ed of which the bailor is aware 
and which interferes with the use of  them or can cau se any loss or 
damage to the bailee or warrants separate provision or arrangement 
for their protection. 
 (2) If the bailor does not make  such disclosure knowingly 
as required to be made pursuant to sub-section (1), to the bailee the
328 
 
bailor shall be liable for any loss or damage arising from such 
goods or such non-disclosure. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (2), 
if the goods are bailed for hire, the bailor shall be responsible for any 
loss or damage resulted from any fa ults in such goods even if the 
bailor was not aware of the existence of such faults in such goods.  
578. Obligations of bailee: (1) The bailee shall, take care of 
(herbichar)  and protect the goods ba iled to him or her in 
accordance with the terms and condi tions specified in  the contract 
and, reasonable care of goods, as his or her own in the absence of 
such terms and conditions.  
(2) Except as otherwise provided  for in the contract, if any 
goods bailed are lost, stolen, damage d, depreciated, deteriorated or 
destroyed because of a disaster in  spite of the r easonable care and 
protection pursuant to sub-section (1), the bailee shall not be liable 
to return such goods. 
Provided that if the goods are lost, stolen, damaged, 
depreciated, deteriorated  or destroyed because of recklessness or 
mala fide intention of the bailee or of hi s or her failure to take care 
of or protect the goods according to  the terms and conditions of the 
contract, the bailee shal l be liable to return the goods or pay an 
amount equivalent to the price thereof to the bailor. 
(3) If the bailee uses the bailed goods without 
authorization to do so under, or in a manner contrary to the terms 
and conditions of, the contract, th e bailee shall pay compensation to
329 
 
the bailor for any damage, loss, de struction or deterioration arising 
to the goods from such use. 
(4) Except as otherwise provid ed for in the contract, the 
bailee shall not mix the bailor's g oods with his or her own goods. 
Provided that if th e bailee, with the co nsent of the bailor, 
mixes the goods of the bailor wi th his or her own goods, both 
parties shall have an in terest, in proportion to  their respective share, 
in the mixture thus  produced and income  accrued therefrom. 
(5) If the bailee, without cons ent of the bailor, mixes the 
goods of the bailor with his or her own goods, and the goods so 
mixed can be separated, the title of the property in goods shall 
remain in the parties respectively,  but the bailee shall be bound to 
bear the expenses for separation an d the damage, if any, arising to 
the bailor from the mixture. 
(6) If the bailee, without cons ent of the bailor, mixes the 
goods of the bailor with his or her own goods, and the goods so 
mixed cannot be separate d pursuant to sub-sec tion (5), the bailor 
shall have right in such goods. 
579. To return  bailed goods : (1) The bailee shall return the bailed 
goods to the bailor  after the expiry  of the period specified at the 
time of bailment of th e goods or after the accomplishment of the 
purpose for which the goods were bailed. 
(2) If the bailee does not return  the goods within the period 
specified for retuning them pursuant  to sub-section (1) or within a 
reasonable period accord ing to the nature of the goods failing such 
specified period or if the bailor  refuses to take the goods back
330 
 
within such a period and if the goods are lost, st olen, damaged, 
destroyed or deteriorated or any loss or damage is caused to the 
bailor due to such  goods from that date, the respective party shall be 
liable for the loss or damage aris ing from his or her own default. 
(3) Except as otherwise provided  for in the contract, in the 
case of bailment of the goods owned by more than one person, the 
bailee may return the goods to any on e of the joint owners, or to the 
person assigned by them, and if the goods are so  returned, the 
goods shall be deemed to have been duly returned. 
(4) If the bailee does not hold the goods bailed to him or 
her in accordance with the terms and conditions of th e contract, the 
bailor may take back the goods at any time. 
(5) Except as otherwise provid ed for in the contract, the 
goods increased or earned  from the bailed good s, shall also belong 
to the bailor. 
580. Bailor to be liable for  other's goods bailed : If the bailor bails any 
goods in which he or she has no title, right or ownership to the 
bailee and the bailee is compelled to bear any claim or loss or 
damage to a third party from such bailment or bear any costs in 
relation to the bailment, the bailor shall also be liable to pay such 
costs. 
581. Goods given for repair and maintenance to be returned : (1) If 
any goods are delivered to a person  for their repair, improvement or 
renovation in any manner, the pe rson shall repair, improve and 
renovate those goods and return th em to the concer ned owner, upon 
charging the costs or se rvice charge for such repair, improvement or
331 
 
renovation within the period specifi ed in the contr act. If the goods 
are not so returned with in the specified period or  any additional loss 
or damage is caused to the goods or  the goods are so  damaged as to 
be unusable in the course of thei r repair, improvement or renovation, 
that person shall be liable to pay the compensation specified in the 
contract and, failing such provision, a reas onable compensation to 
the concerned owner. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
the person who repairs, improves or  renovates the goods shall have 
the right to retain them until the payment of the costs incurred in 
the repair, improvement or renovati on of such good s or the service 
charge if paid, and if such costs or  service fee are not paid within a 
reasonable period, that  person may recover th e costs or service fee 
by selling the goods. 
582. Costs incurred in taking care of (herbichar)  bailed goods:  
Except as otherwise provided for in  the contract, the bailor shall 
bear the expenses incurr ed in the bailment of  goods and in the care 
or security of th e bailed goods. 
583. Contract of bailment to be void: If it is proved that any goods are 
bailed with the intention of disent itling partition share, abstaining 
from paying any payable government  fee or amount payable to any 
one or for any other illegal purpos e, such a contract of bailment 
shall be void. 
584. Statute of  limitation: A person who is aggrieve d from an act done 
or action taken under this Chapte r may make a lawsuit within two 
years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.
332 
 
Chapter-9 
Provisions Relating to Collateral or Deposit 
585. Contract of pledge or deposit deemed to be made: (1) If a person 
takes delivery of goods as security for payment of a debt lent to 
another person, a contract of coll ateral is deemed  to have been 
concluded and if a person takes deli very of goods as  a security for 
the performance of a promise by another person, a contract of 
deposit shall be deemed to have been concluded.  
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter, the term 
“goods” means any proper ty and includes title to or an instrument 
establishing title to that property.  
(2) A contract of collateral or deposit may be made 
pursuant to sub-section (1) in relation to the debt for the payment of 
which security is taken and interest  of the debt, and if a deposit is 
taken as a security for the performance of a promise, other expenses 
related to that promise and expe nses incurred in the care of 
(herchaha)collateraled or deposited goods. 
586. To return goods collateraled or deposited: (1) Except as 
otherwise provided for in the contra ct, after the payment of the debt 
for which the collater ha s been taken or after the performance of the 
promise for which person deposit ha s been taken shall be returned 
to the concerned.  
(2) If the collateral or deposi t taken under sub-section (1) 
is or may be divided into differen t parts, the collat eral or deposit 
may be returned to the extent c overed by the resp ective portion of 
the debt repaid or the promise performed.
333 
 
587. Rights of the person who ob tains collateral or deposit: (1) If a 
debt has been taken having pledge d any goods as a collateral for its 
payment and makes a default in paym ent of the debt or interest of 
the debt, if any, within the sp ecified period, the person who has 
taken the collateral may initiate th e right to take legal action to 
recover the debt in accordance with  law, by selling or auctioning 
the collateral so given at the prevai ling market price or transfer the 
ownership of such security  in his or her name su bject to law, if such 
sale or auction cannot be made. 
(2) If the goods pledged as coll ateral are sold at a price 
lesser than the amount recoverabl e by the person who has taken the 
collateral from the borrower under sub-section (1), such a person 
shall be entitled to recover the shortfall amount from the other 
assets of the borrower, and the coll ateral is sold at  a price higher 
than the amount to be recovered, the excess amount shall be 
returned to the borrower. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything containing in sub-sections 
(1) and (2), the person  who has given the goods as collateral may 
take back his or her goods at any time by paying the debt and 
interest thereon and other amounts, if any, due and payable prior to 
the sale of the pledged goods or the transfer of ownership thereof. 
Provided that the person who has given the collateral shall 
also be liable to bear additional liability arising to the goods 
pledged from his or her failure to pay the amount within the 
specified period. 
(4) If a deposit is taken as a security for the performance 
of a promise and the promise is no t performed or completed within
334 
 
the specified time, the goods pledged as deposit may be used for the 
performance of the promise or the expenses incurred in such 
performance may be recove red from such goods. 
(5) If the promise cannot be  performed from the goods 
pledged as deposit, such shortfa ll amount may be recovered from 
the other assets of the borrower. 
588. Consequences of pledge or deposit of goods by non-owner: (1) If 
anyone borrows a debt or enters in to a promise by pledging to the 
creditor any goods in which the he or she has no right or ownership 
or which has been obtained unde r a contract which is void under 
this Part and the pledgee does not know that fact, the pledgee shall 
have the right to demand the borrow er giving such a collateral or 
deposit to give collater al or deposit of the goods owned by him or 
her equal to that amount, and if th e he or she fails to give the 
collateral or deposit so demanded, the pledgee shall have the right 
to get the contract voided.  
(2)  If any goods obtained under a void contract are 
pledged as a collateral or depo sit and the contract has already 
become void before giving such coll ateral or deposi t or the pledgee 
had the knowledge that the good s pledged as the collateral or 
deposit did not belong to the pl edger, the pledgee shall have no 
right in such goods and may recove r the amount to be recovered by 
him or her or have the prom ise performed from other goods 
belonging to the pledger. 
(3) If the pledger has a partia l or limited title to, or 
ownership of, the goods pledged as  the collateral or deposit, the
335 
 
pledgee also shall have right and title to such goods to that extent 
only. 
589. Creditors to be on equal footing ( pari pasu): (1)  If a person has 
borrowed debt from two or more cr editors at a time or several times 
by pledging any of his or her goods  as a collateral and the goods so 
pledged as the collateral are not sufficient to pay the debt of all the 
creditors, except as othe rwise provided for in the contract, all the 
creditors who have taken the goods as  collateral shal l be deemed to 
be in pari pasu in respect of the debt ou tstanding and sh all have the 
right to make a proportionate claim on the goods accordingly.  
(2) A contract entered into giving priority right in the 
future to a creditor on the goods already pledged as collateral 
pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be void. If a creditor has already 
recovered his or her debt  from such a collateral  before the contract 
becomes void in spite of  knowing that there are also other creditors 
in respect of the securi ty, such a credit or shall return the amount to 
other creditors and recove r his or her debt from  other assets of the 
pledger. 
590. Statute of  limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act 
done or action taken under this Ch apter may make a lawsuit within 
two years after the date of th e accrual of the cause of action.
336 
 
Chapter-10 
Provisions Relating to Contracts of Agency 
591. Contract of agen cy deemed to be made : Any person may appoint 
any other person as his or her ag ent to do any act on his or her 
behalf, except on the matter of hi s or her personal ability, to 
conduct business as his or her agent or carry on any transaction 
with a third person on his or her beha lf or to represent him or her to 
such a person or to establish an y type of legal relation with the 
person appointing an agent (the pr incipal) and a thir d person, and if 
an agent is so appointe d, a contract of agency  shall be deemed to 
have been concluded. 
592. Recognition of transact ion carried out by agent : (1) Whatever a 
person can do on his or her own, the person may get the same done, 
or cause to be done, through an  agent, subject to the law. 
Provided that no act may be done through an agent for which 
one has to be present in person. 
(2) A contract concluded th rough an agent appointed 
pursuant to Section 591 or act done  by the agent shall be deemed to 
have been carried out by the con cerned person and the obligation 
arising out of such an act shall be performed as if the contract were 
concluded or act done by the principal. 
Provided that if the agent has done any act beyond his or her 
authority, the principal shall not be liable for such an  act other than 
that accepted by him or her.
337 
 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if, out of the acts done beyond auth ority, some acts ar e within his or 
her authority and some are beyond it and the part done within his or 
her authority can be separated, the principal shall be liable to the 
extent of the acts done within authority. 
593. Power to appoint sub-agent: (1) If it is necessary  to appoint a sub-
agent according to the nature of an y trade, business or transaction 
or a sub-agent may be appointed having regard to the provision of 
the contract or usage of the contract  of agency, the agent may, 
except as otherwise provided for in the contract , appoint a sub-
agent with the consen t of the principal.  
Provided that an agent who has been appointed on the 
condition that he or she shall re present or do any act personally may 
not appoint a sub-agent. 
(2) If a sub-agent is appointed pursuant to sub-section (1), 
the agent shall give in formation thereof to th e principal, and the 
rights and obligations of the sub- agent so appointed shall be the 
same as that of the agent appointed by the principal. 
(3) If an agent appoints a sub- agent without the consent of 
the principal, the principal shall not be liable for any act done or 
action taken by the sub-agent. 
(4) The agent appointing the su b-agent shall be personally 
liable for the acts referred to in sub-section (3).
338 
 
594. matters to be co m p l i e d  w i t h  b y  a g e n t : (1) Except as otherwise 
provided for in the contract, an  agent shall comply with the 
following matters: 
(a) To act subject to the te rms and conditions of the 
contract of agency and th e directions given by the 
principal, 
(b) In the absence of any te rms and conditions in the 
contract or any direction give n by the principal, to do 
the business of agen cy in good faith, with full diligence 
and necessary care and skill,  accordance to the nature 
of the act and business assi gned to him or her and the 
laws and usages of th e place of transaction, 
  Provided that if , at the time of the conclusion of 
the contract, the principal wa s aware that the agent has 
no efficiency or cap acity in relation to any matter, the 
agent shall not be liable for any loss or damage 
resulting from such inefficiency or inca pacity of him or 
her. 
(c) On the removal from an agent, not to do any act as 
usual in the capacity of an agent on the same business. 
(d)  To render or show the details of account s and records 
of the agency business to th e principal at the time of 
demand, 
(e) In the case of any obstruct ion, obstacle or difficulty 
arising in the course of bu siness of the agency, to
339 
 
notify the principal as soon as possible and obtain 
necessary directions, and th e principal shall be liable 
for any act done according to  the direction so given. 
(2) If the principal suffers any loss or damage because of 
the failure of the agent to perform his or her duties un der clauses (a), 
(b) and (c) of sub-section (1), th e agent shall pers onally bear such 
loss or damage. 
595. Agent to be responsible: (1) Except as otherwis e provided for in 
the contract, the agent shall, in any of the following circumstances, 
be personally liable for the trans action done by him or her on behalf 
of the principal:  
(a) If the agent concludes a cont ract with a third party in 
relation to any transaction with provision for personal 
responsibility, 
(b) If any act is done for or on behalf of an undisclosed 
principal and such a principal is not disclosed, 
(c) If the principal cannot be sued for any reason, 
(d)  If the contract is conclu ded in his or her own name, 
(e)  If any act is done beyond the scope of the contract of 
agency or authority, 
(f)  If any misrepresentation or fraud is committed in the 
course of the transaction, 
(g)  If the agent is required  to be liable personally 
according to the natu re of the trade,
340 
 
(h)  If the interest of the ag ent is also involved in the 
transaction. 
(2) Except as otherwise provi ded for in the contract 
between the agent and a third pers on, nothing shall be deemed to 
bar the making of any claim by the third person against the 
principal merely by the reason th at the agent is personally liable 
pursuant to sub-section (1), an d legal action may also be taken 
against the principal for a sum not recovered from the agent. 
(3) For the purposes of taki ng a legal actio n against the 
principal pursuant to sub-section (2), the statute of limitation shall 
be deemed to commence from the date  of the last payment made by 
the agent. 
596. Principal to be liable when lead ing to believe that act is done 
with authority:  (1) If the principal give s information to a third 
party that he or she has given auth ority to another person to act on 
his or her behalf or leads the third party to so believe, the principal 
shall be liable for any act done by  the agent on his or her behalf 
unless the third party has come to know or has reasonable ground to 
know that the authority has not been so given. 
(2) In the cases referred to in  sub-section (1), the principal 
may be liable even for the act done by the agent beyond the 
authority if there is a reasonable ground fo r the third party to 
believe that the agent has authority.
341 
 
597. Termination of agency: (1) Except as otherw ise provided for in 
the contract, the agen cy shall be deemed to be terminated ipso facto, 
in any of the following circumstances:  
(a)  If the agent voluntaril y renounces the agency and 
gives a notice thereof to the principal, 
(b)  If the principal revokes the authority given to the 
agency or the contract of agency or gives a notice to 
the agent on the impossibility of performance of the 
contract, 
(c)  If the agent is appoint ed for any specific business 
and that business is completed, 
(d)  If the agent is appoint ed for a specific period and 
that period expires, 
(e)  If the principal or the agent dies or becomes of 
unsound mind, 
(f)  If the principal is declared to be insolvent, 
(g)  If the matter for whic h the agent is appointed no 
longer exists, 
(h)  If an agent is appoint ed by a body corporate and 
such a body is liqui dated or dissolved. 
(2) The principal may revoke any or whole of the authority 
given to the agent at any time before the agent exercises the 
authority, and if the authority is so revoked, the principal shall 
immediately give a notice thereof to the agent.
342 
 
Provided that if the agent has already exer cised some of such 
authority, the authority sh all not be deemed to have been revoked in 
relation to the act al ready done in exercise  of the authority  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, if the agent al so has a share in the pr operty connected with 
the main business of the agency, the agent may not be removed in 
such manner as to be pr ejudicial to such share. 
598. Agent may not be removed: (1) Except as otherw ise provided in 
the contract, if an agent is appoin ted for any specif ic period or act, 
the principal shall not remove the agent before the expiry of that 
period or before the completion of  that act, except for a reasonable 
and sufficient reason.  
(2) An agent who is appoin ted without sp ecifying any 
certain period or act shall not be  removed without giving a prior 
notice along with an appropriate reason. 
(3) If the principal removes th e agent in contravention of 
sub-section (1) or (2), the principal shall pay a reasonable 
compensation to the agent. 
599. Renunciation of agen cy by agent not allowed:  (1) 
Notwithstanding anything containe d elsewhere in this Chapter, 
except as otherwise prov ided for in the contra ct, an agent appointed 
for a specific period or act shall not renounce th e agency before the 
expiry of, or comple tion of, such period  or act, except for a 
reasonable and su fficient reason.
343 
 
(2) Any agent appointed without  specifying any period or 
act under sub-section (1) shall not renounce the agency without 
giving a prior notice along with th e reason for such renunciation to 
the principal. 
(3) If any agent renounces the agency in contravention of 
sub-section (1) or (2), the pr incipal may claim a reasonable 
compensation. 
600. Removal of  sub-agent together with agent: If an agent ceases to 
exist under this Part, the sub-ag ent appointed by him or her shall 
also be deemed to have, ipso facto, been removed. 
601. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggr ieved form any act 
done or action taken under this Ch apter may make a lawsuit within 
two years after the date of accrual of the cause of action.
344 
 
Chapter-11 
Provisions Relating to Cont racts for Carriage of Goods 
602. Contract for carriage of  goods deemed to be made: (1) If a 
contract is concluded for the car riage of any goods from one place 
to another, a contract for the carriage of goods  shall be deemed to 
have been concluded.  
(2) Except as otherwise provid ed for in th e contract, a 
receipt or bill to be is sued by the carrier to  the owner of goods at 
the time of handing over the goods for carriage shall be recognized 
as an evidence of the contract c oncluded between the carrier and the 
owner of the goods. 
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter, the term 
“carrier” means a person operating a transport service other than air 
or marine transport, or a person engaged in the business of such 
transport, and also includes a person operating the business of 
carriage through internal navigation  transport, rope-way or animal 
or any other means. 
Provided that if any person em ployed by the owner of goods 
on wage basis or his or her agent or a person working under his or 
her supervision carries goods, such a person shall not be deemed to 
be a carrier for the purp oses of this Chapter. 
603. Carrier’s obligations: (1) It shall be the obligation of the carrier to 
carry the goods receive d from the owner of the goods for carriage 
to the specified destinat ion in proper condition. 
(2) If the goods received from the owner of the goods for 
carriage are lost, destroyed, brok en, defaced or damaged or the
345 
 
goods do not reach to the specified destinati on in proper condition 
in any other manner, the carrier  shall be liable for that. 
(3) The carrier shall carry the goods within the time 
specified in the contr act, and within a reasona ble time, if no period 
for transporting the g oods is specified in th e contract, and deliver 
the goods to the owner of the good s or his or her agent or a person 
designated by him or her. 
604. Carrier to be liable:  (1) If more than one carrier or mode of 
transport is involved in the carriage of any goods, except as 
otherwise provided for in the c ontract, the carrier to whom the 
owner of the goods has been handed over the goods sh all be liable. 
(2) If any goods are stolen, lost, damaged or destroyed 
prior to the carriage and delivery of such good s by the carrier to the 
concerned person, the carrier shall be liable for that. 
Provided that if the goods are stolen, lost, damaged or 
destroyed due to a disaster or acci dent, the carrier shall not be liable 
for that. 
605. Right to sell goods wi thout consent of owner: (1) If the carrier 
fails to carry any goods to the destination within the specified time 
due to a disaster or acci dent in the course of  carriage of the goods 
and such goods are perish able or their price or quality is susceptible 
to decrease significant ly, the carrier may sell such goods even 
without the consent of the owner.  
(2) The carrier shall pay the amount so obtained from the 
sale made pursuant to sub- section (1) to the owner.
346 
 
606. Carrier’s liability to be limited: (1) Except where the owner of 
goods or his or her agent has cl early declared at the time of 
conclusion of the contract that th e value of the good s to be carried 
is more or except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the 
compensation for any loss or da mage to the goods  carried by the 
carrier shall not exceed on e hundred thousand rupees. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
the carrier shall not be liable for any loss or damage to any gold, 
silver, diamond, jewelry or article s made thereof, precious stone, 
bill of exchange, security, document registered at office, certificate 
issued by an academic and other in stitute, coin, bank  note, postal 
stamp, fish, meat, fresh fruits a nd vegetable, insecticide and toxic 
material, inflammable material, pe troleum product, precious fine art 
work, idol, curio goods or glass or  goods made of glass or highly 
breakable or fragile goods, wildli fe and domestic animal, handicraft 
product, arms and ammunition, explosive, electronic equipment 
(radio, television, computer, mobile  or similar othe r good) and their 
spare parts, machinery and such goo ds as specified by the law to be 
declared by the owner before th e carriage, except where the owner 
or his or her agent has made explic it declaration at the time of the 
conclusion of contract or at the time of handin g over of the goods to 
the carrier for carriage. 
(3) For the purpose of bearing the risks involved in the 
carriage of goods under sub-section (2), the carrier may insure the 
goods through th e owner of the goods or hi s or her agent or insure 
the goods by himself or herself havi ng charged separate fee to the
347 
 
owner or the carrier may make other necessary provisions for 
preventing the risks. 
607. To bear compensation:  The carrier shall, for such loss, damage or 
harm as caused to the goods declared at  the time of the conclusion 
of contract or at the time of handing over the goods to the carrier 
for carriage under this Chapte r or the goods not requiring 
declaration, in the cour se of their carriage, be  liable to pay to the 
owner the compensation, if any, specified in the contract, to 
reimburse for the goods carried with  the consent of the owner if no 
such compensation is sp ecified in the contract or failing such 
consent, the prevailing price of  such goods, and failing the 
determination of the price, a reason able price and also a reasonable 
compensation for the loss and dama ge caused to the owner of the 
goods, subject to Chap ter-5 of this Part. 
608. Termination of carrier's liability: Except as otherwise provided 
for in the contract, the carrier's lia bility shall be deemed to have 
been terminated in  any of the following circumstances:  
(a) If the carrier or his or he r agent carries and hands over 
the goods to the owner of th e goods or his or her agent 
or the person designated by him or her, 
(b) If the goods handed over to the carrier are taken back 
by the owner of the goods or  his or her agent prior to 
the carriage thereof, 
(c) If the carrier or his or he r agent returns the goods to the 
owner of the goods or his or her agent specifying the 
reason that the goods canno t be carried within the
348 
 
specified time because of th e circumstance referred to 
in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 531. 
609. Statute of  limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act 
done or action taken under this Ch apter may make a lawsuit within 
two years after the date of accrual of the cause of action.
349 
 
Chapter-12 
Provisions Relating to Contracts of Lease 
610. A contract of leas e deemed to be made:  (1) If a contract is 
concluded under which a person give s any goods in which he or she 
has right and possession to anothe r person for use and possession 
and enjoy the benefits accrued therefrom in consideration for a rent 
payable regularly for a certain peri od, a contract of lease shall be 
deemed to be concluded.  
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter, the term 
“goods" means any prop erty from which benefit may be acquired 
through consumption, possession or use without diminishing them.  
(2) If a contract of lease is  concluded pursuant to sub-
section (1), except as otherwise pr ovided for in th e contract, the 
lessor shall ensure the less ee of the following matters: 
(a) To transfer certain go ods for use and possession 
according to the contract, 
(b) To maintain the goods tran sferred pursuant to clause 
(a) in a running condition so that they may be 
possessed or used at the time of the transfer,  
(c) To make arrangements so  that the good s transferred 
pursuant to clause (a) or (b) can be possessed or used 
peacefully and withou t any hindrance. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, any goods destroyable in use or consumable goods may not 
be leased.
350 
 
611. Form of the leas ed goods not to  be changed: The lessee shall not 
change the original form of the l eased goods withou t the consent of 
the owner during the period of the contract of lease. 
Provided that nothing contained in this Section shall prevent 
the repairing, maintaining, improv ing or renovating of the leased 
goods. 
612. To use the leased  goods in good faith:  (1) The lessee shall have 
the right to possess and use the leas ed goods in good faith and in a 
prudential manner as if the goods we re owned by himself or herself. 
(2) While possessing and usin g the leased goods pursuant 
to sub-section (1), the lessee shall possess and use them in 
consonance with the object of the cont ract of lease.  
(3) If the lessee is proved to have possessed and used the 
leased goods contrary to sub-s ection (1) or (2), the lessor may 
terminate such a cont ract at any time. 
613. To repair and maintain leased goods: (1) Except as otherwise 
provided for in the cont ract of lease, the le ssor shall repair and 
maintain the leased goods.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if the possession or use of the l eased goods cannot be made without 
their immediate repair, maintena nce or renovation, the lessee 
himself or herself may repair, main tain or renovate such goods by 
giving information thereof to the lessor. 
(3) The lessor shall reimburse or adjust in lease rent the 
expenses incurred in the repair, maintenan ce or renovation made 
pursuant to sub-section (2).
351 
 
614. Lessor to be informed if  goods are not usable:   (1) If the leased 
goods or any part thereof are lo st, damaged or destroyed in any 
manner, are not capable of being po ssessed or used for any reason, 
any person makes a claim or disput e of any kind in relation to such 
goods or any part thereof or an y person creates hindrance or 
disturbance in any manner while po ssessing or usin g the goods, the 
lessee shall give information ther eof to the lessor immediately. 
(2) Upon receipt of information pursuant to sub-section (1), 
the lessor shall carry ou t such repair, maintena nce or renovation or 
obtain such legal remedies as may be necessary to restore the goods 
into their original co ndition according to th e nature of the goods 
within fifteen days.  
(3) In the case of failure to restore the leased goods into 
their original condition within the period referred to in sub-section 
(2), the lease rent shall be subject  to reduction in proportion to the 
extent to which such goods have b een lost, damaged or destroyed or 
become incapable of being used  or possessed or such claim, 
hindrance or dispute has been made. 
615. Lessee to be liable: (1) The lessee shall poss ess or use the leased 
goods by taking adequate safety measures having regard to the 
nature of the goods in order to sa ve the leased goods  from loss or 
damage.  
(2) If the leased goods  are lost or destro yed for any reason 
or the price of the goods  decreases due to loss or destruction thereof 
in any manner or due to loss becau se of negligence on the part of 
the lessee, any member of  his or her family, his or her agent or the 
third party, during the validity of the contract of lease, the lessee
352 
 
shall be liable therefor , and the lessee shall re store such goods into 
their original condition, and if th e lessee fails to do so, he or she 
shall be liable to pa y compensation therefor. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) 
or (2),  the lessee shall not be liable fo r the loss or damage, if any, 
caused to the leased  goods due to any force majeure event.  
(4) If partial loss or damage is caused to th e leased goods 
due to a force majeure  event pursuant to su b-section (3) and the 
lessor does not restore such goods into their original condition or 
such restoration is not possible, the lessor shal l reduce the lease rent 
in proportion to the loss or damage. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term 
"force majeure event" means a ny of the following events: 
(a) A storm, earthquake, eruption of volcano, 
(b) Excessive rain, flood, landslide, soil erosion, 
thunder-storm, 
(c) Fire caused in any manner other than that caused 
by dishonesty, negligence or  recklessness on the 
part of the lessee or hi s or her family member, 
employee, worker or third party, 
(d) Act of terrorism, ci vil riot, civil war, 
(e) Other natural calamity of similar nature beyond 
human control. 
616. To pay lease rent: (1) The lessee shall pay to  the lessor the lease 
rent according to the terms and cond itions of the contract of lease.
353 
 
(2) If the terms and conditions of payment of the lease rent 
are not specified in th e contract pursuant to  sub-section (1), the 
lessee shall pay the leas e rent on the next da y of the end of each 
month, in the case of a movable prop erty, within fift een days of the 
end of every fiscal year, in the case of farmland, servitude, land 
leased for industrial or infrastru cture building or housing, and 
within a week of the e nd of every month, in the case of other goods. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, if any person does not le t the lessee fully possess and use 
such goods or any pa rt thereof by showin g any defect in the 
ownership and possession  of the leased goods or any part thereof, 
creating any type of hindrance or obstruction or making a claim in 
relation thereto, the lessee may re duce the lease rent  in proportion 
thereto. 
617. Validity period of cont ract of lease:  (1) No contract of lease 
concluded in relation to the foll owing goods shall remain valid for 
more than the following period: 
(a) Thirty-five years in th e case of housing land 
leased for the construc tion of a building or 
housing land in use after construction of a 
building therein, 
(b) Thirty-five years in the cas e of the land leased for 
the purpose of servitude, 
(c) Forty years in the case of  the land leased for the 
purpose of construction, development and
354 
 
operation of the infrastructures such as industrial 
structure, roads, canals,  electricity generation, 
(d) Twenty years in the case of land for farming;  
(e) Nineteen years in the case of house and land 
leased for the purposes ot her than that referred to 
in clause (a), (b ), (c) or (d), 
(f) Fifteen years in the case of a motor vehicle,  
(g) Fifteen years in the case of machinery equipment 
other than a motor vehicle, 
(h) Fifteen years in the case of machinery equipment 
other than that referred to  in clause (f) or (g), 
(i) Ten years in the case of a domestic animal, 
(j) Ten years in the case of g oods other than that set 
forth in this Section having  regard to their life and 
nature.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
the parties may extend the validity pe riod of the contract of lease, 
subject to the validity period of the contract, before  e x p i r y  o f  t h e  
period referred to in such a sub-section. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (2), 
the parties to a contract of leas e may decide whether to extend the 
period of the contract of lease having regard  to the place where the 
leased house and land are situated and the na ture of the goods. 
618. Leased goods may be sub-leased : (1) The lessee may, with the 
prior consent of the lessor, sub-leas e to any person the goods or any
355 
 
part thereof leased under the c ontract of lease, by concluding 
another contract of l ease to that effect. 
(2) The lessee shall not be free from his or her obligation 
towards the lessor for the reason th at he or she has made a sub-lease 
pursuant to sub-section (1). 
(3) The terms and conditions of  such a sub-l ease contract 
concluded pursuant to sub-section (1) in relation to  the goods on 
sub-lease shall not be di fferent than the terms and conditions of the 
first contract of lease.  
(4) While determining the terms and conditions of the 
contract of leas e pursuant to sub-section (3), provision may be so 
made that the sub-lessee shall be directly liable to the lessor in 
respect of the leased goods, and if such prov ision is made, the sub-
lessee shall be liable to the lessor  to the extent of the sub-lease 
contract.  
(5) The validity period of th e contract of lease made 
pursuant to sub-sectio n (1) shall not exceed th e validity period of 
the contract of lease concluded be tween the lessor and the lessee.  
(6) If the lessor makes recourse  to any legal remedy or a 
claim against the lessee under this Chapter, the sub-lessee shall not 
be liable therefor except in the case referr ed to in sub-section (4).  
(7) Nothing shall be deemed to  have been prejudiced in 
any manner the right which the lessor may exercise under the 
contract of lease base d on anything contained in this Section,. 
619. To return leased goods:  (1) Except as otherwise provided for in 
the contract of lease, if the contr act of lease is terminated for any
356 
 
reason, the lessee shall return the goods leased  under this Chapter to 
the lessor within thirty-five days of the termination of the contract 
of lease. 
Provided that, in the case of an immovable property, the 
lessor shall be deemed to be entitled, ipso facto,  to possess that 
goods after thirty-five days of th e termination of the contract of 
lease. 
(2) The lessee shall return the goods leased  pursuant to 
sub-section (1) to the lessor on th e same condition as they were 
received at the tim e of lease.  
Provided that the le ssee shall not be liab le for any natural 
decay or depreciation caused from  the possession and use of the 
goods. 
(3) If a record of the goods or  accessories and spare parts 
thereof has been maintained at th e time of leasing the goods, the 
goods and accessories and spare pa rts thereof according to such 
record shall also be returned, while return ing the leased goods 
pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2).  
Provided that the acce ssories or spare part s that get lost or 
destroyed in the course of po ssession and use according to the 
nature of the goods n eed not be returned. 
620. Special provision relati ng to the contract of  lease of immovable 
property: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Chapter, a contract of lease of any immovable property shall be 
concluded in writing.
357 
 
(2) While leasing any immovabl e property for a period of 
more than ten years, the contract of lease, setting out such matter, 
shall be registered in a body legall y authorized for that purpose.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Chapter, no immovable property  can, without consent of the 
Government of Nepal, be leased  to a person who cannot acquire 
ownership in any immovable proper ty in Nepal according to law, 
for the purpose of farming, constr ucting a building or housing and 
land development. 
(4) In returning any building, shed or other structure built 
by the lessee, or the garden, forest  or trees located , in the land 
leased under the contract of lease to the lessor upon  the expiry of 
the validity period of the contract  of lease, excep t as otherwise 
provided for in the cont ract, the lessee shall be deemed to have right 
and ownership in such building, shed or other structure or garden, 
forest or trees located therein,  and the lessee shall accordingly 
remove such building, sh ed, structure, garden, forest or trees from 
such land. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (4), 
if the lessor desires to take such building, shed or other structure or 
garden, forest or trees located in  such land on the as is where is 
basis, the lessor shall pay the mu tually agreed price for the same. 
621. Contract of leas e may be terminated:  (1) The  lessor may 
terminate the contract of l ease in any of the following 
circumstances:
358 
 
(a) Except as otherwise perm itted by the lessor, if the 
lessee fails to pay the lease amount until ninety days 
after the due date for the payment of the lease rent 
has expired, 
(b) If the lessee possesses or us es the leased goods taken 
contrary to Section 612,  
(c) If the lessee fails to give information to the lessor or 
keep him or her informed about the matters referred 
to in sub-section (1) of Section 614,  
(d) If the lessee fails to restor e the leased goods into their 
original condition having re gard to the nature of the 
goods pursuant to sub-sect ion (2) of Section 615, 
(e) If the goods leased are s ub-leased without the prior 
consent of the lessor.  
(2) The lessee may terminate th e contract of lease in any 
of following circumstances: 
(a) If the leased goo ds cannot be possessed or used for the 
purpose or object for which the goods have been leased, 
(b) If the lessor fails to reimburse the repair and 
maintenance costs or make it s adjustment to the lease 
rent pursuant to sub-sect ion (3) of Section 613, 
(c) If the lessor does not re duce or agree to reduce the 
lease rent amount pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 
614 or sub-section (4) of Section 615.
359 
 
622. Provisions relating to house rent to apply: Notwithstanding 
anything contained elsewh ere in this Chapter, in matters concerning 
house rent the provis ions of Chapter-9 of  Part 4 shall apply.  
623. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggr ieved from any act 
done or action taken under this Ch apter may make a lawsuit within 
two years after the date of th e accrual of the cause of action.
360 
 
Chapter-13 
Provisions Relating to Hire-Purchase Contracts 
624. Hire-purchase contract  deemed to be made: (1)  If a person lets 
any goods to another person for hire on the following terms and 
conditions, a hire-pur chase contract shall be deemed to be 
concluded: 
(a) The hirer has the right of possession and use of 
the goods let by the owne r of the goods, on the 
condition of payment of the rent amount by 
installments in periodic  basis for that goods, 
(b) The hirer has the right to purchase the goods on 
hire according to the term s and conditions of the 
contract, 
(c) The ownership of such goods would be 
transferred to the hirer up on payment of the last 
installment,  
(d) The hirer may terminate the contract at any time 
prior to the transfer of  ownership pursuant to 
clause (c). 
(2) The contract referred to in sub-section (1) shall be 
concluded in writing. 
(3) The owner of the goods sh all provide one copy of the 
contract concluded pursuant to this  Section to the hirer free of cost 
as soon as the contra ct is so concluded. 
 Explanation:  For the purposes of this Chapter,-
361 
 
(1) "Goods" means any movable property that may be let 
for hire for the purpose of  its possession and use. 
(2) "Hirer” means a person wh o takes any goods on hire 
for possession and use accord ing to the hire-purchase 
contract and also includes his or her successor in the 
event of his or her death or other third person to 
receive such goods under the contract. 
625. Matters to be specified in hire-purchase contract: (1) The 
following matters shall be specified in the hi re-purchase contract 
referred to in Section 624: 
(a) The goods and short description thereof, 
(b) Hire-purchase pr ice of the goods, 
(c) Cash price of  the goods, 
(d) The date of commencem ent of the contract,  
(e) The amount of installmen t payable by the hirer to 
the owner of goods and the number of installments, 
(f) The due date for paymen t of each installment and 
the mode of payment, 
(g) The person and place for the payment of amount 
pursuant to clause (f). 
(2) If an installment can be paid by any mode other than 
cash pursuant to clause (f) of su b-section (1), a brief description 
thereof shall be specified in  the hire-purchase contract. 
(3) If a hire-purchase contr act has been made without 
specifying any of the terms and conditions  referred to in this
362 
 
Section, the hirer may su e for the rescission of such contract, and if 
the court thinks that non-specifi cation of any of such terms and 
conditions in the contract is detr imental to the hirer, the court may 
rescind such contract or issue any su ch other order as it thinks fit.  
 Explanation:   For the purposes of this Chapter,- 
(1) "Hire purchase price" means the total amount to be paid 
by the hirer to purchase or acquire the goods upon 
payment of the full price of the goods, and also includes 
an amount to be paid as deposit or down payment. 
(2) "Cash price" means the pr ice to be paid in cash by 
which the hirer may purchase any goods. 
626. Conclusion of more than one contract to be deemed as 
conclusion of single contract:  (1) If several contracts are concluded 
in connection with the making of a hire-purchase contract, namely a 
contract between the hirer and th e owner of any goods, a contract 
between a surety guaranteeing the payment of installments of the 
hire-purchase price of such goods or  investor and the owner of such 
goods on the condition of entering into a hire-purchase contract, or in 
the case of any bailed or pledge d goods, a contract between the 
bailor and the bailee of such goods, the contracts shall be deemed to 
be a single contract for the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) If the contracts referred  to in sub-section (1) are 
concluded at different dates, the late st date shall be regarded as the 
date of the formation of the contract. 
627. Consequences of formation of hire-purchase contract:  (1) 
Notwithstanding anything containe d in the contract, the following
363 
 
terms and conditions sh all be deemed to be inherent in the hire-
purchase contract concluded between the parties: 
(a) The hirer has the right of uninterrupted possession 
and use of the hired goods, 
(b) The goods are free from any type of charge or 
claim of any one at the ti me of transf er of the 
goods by the owner to the hirer,  
(c) The owner of the goods has assured that the hirer 
will have a reasonable opportunity to compare 
such goods with the sample, 
(d) The owner of the goods has the right to sell the 
hired goods at the time of the transfer of such 
goods by him to the hirer, 
(e) The goods referred to in clause (a) are of 
satisfactory quality at th e time of the transfer of 
goods,   
(f) If the hirer has inform ed the owner of the goods 
that he or she is hiring the goods for any particular 
purpose, the owner of the goods guarantees that 
such goods or quality th ereof will be appropriate 
for that purpose. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (e) of 
sub-section (1), the owner of the goods shall not be  liable for the 
quality of the goods in any of  the following circumstances: 
(a) The owner of the good s was not aware of the 
defect in the go ods, for which th e hire-purchase
364 
 
contract has been made at the time of conclusion 
of such contract, 
(b) The hire-purchase contract  itself has a stipulation 
about the defect in the quality of the goods, 
(c) If the hirer has collect ed and examined a sample 
of the goods and the quali ty of the goods matches 
with such a sample, 
(d) The hire-purchase cont ract is concluded with 
regard to any second-hand goods and that matter is 
specified in the contract. 
(3) If the hirer takes any goods on hire on the basis of a 
sample, the owner of th e goods shall be deemed  to have assured of 
the fact that all of such goods match with the sample. 
(4) If the description of any goods or qualit y thereof is 
specified in a contract concluded under this Chapter, the owner of 
the goods shall be deem ed to have assured of  the fact that such 
goods or quality thereof shall be as speci fied in the contract. 
Provided that if the sample is also specified in  the contract, 
the matching of the quality of such  goods with that of the sample 
shall not suffice, and it shall be matched with the description of the 
contract at the time of transf erring the whole of the goods. 
628. Transfer of ownership of goods:  The ownership of the goods 
related to a hire-purchas e contract shall be tr ansferred to the hirer 
upon completion of th e purchase according to  the hire-purchase 
price determined in accordance with  the contract concluded under 
this Chapter.
365 
 
Provided that the right to posse ssion and use shall be deemed 
to be created at the time of receiving such goods by him or her. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term 
"completion of the purchase" means the payment of the last 
installment of the hire-purchase price. 
629. Goods on hire to be cared (herchaha)  and maintained:  (1) The 
status of the goods hired under a hire-purchase contract shall be as of 
the bailment until the transfer of their ownership pursuant to Section 
628. 
(2) Except as otherwise provid ed for in the hire-purchase 
contract, the hire r shall take reas onable care of (herbichar)  and 
maintain the goods related to such a contract as if  the goods were 
those owned by himself or herself. 
(3) If such goods are lost or damaged because of the 
failure to take care of (herbichar) and maintain them pursuant to 
sub-section (2), the hirer shall be liable therefor. 
630. Installment to be paid:  The hirer shall pay the amount of 
installment as determined in the hire-purchase contract in 
consideration for the hired goods, within such peri od and according 
to such mode as speci fied in the contract. 
631. Termination of contract  by paying installment:  (1) Except as 
otherwise provided for in the hire -purchase contract , the hirer may, 
during the currency of the contract, term inate the contract by 
making payment of the hire-pur chase price of the goods or 
outstanding installment, and giving  an advance writ ten notice of at 
least fifteen days to the owner of the goods.
366 
 
(2) While terminating the contract  pursuant to sub-section (1), 
the hirer shall also be entitled to the discount of any kind, if any. 
632. Termination of contract by returning goods: (1) Except as 
otherwise provided for in the cont ract, the hirer may, at any time 
prior to the payment of the last in stallment as determined according 
to the hire-purchase contract for the goods, terminate the contract by 
giving a written notice to the owner of goods at least fifteen days in 
advance. 
(2) Prior to terminating the contract pursuant to sub-
section (1), the hirer shall deliver or return  the hired goods to the 
owner according to the hire-purch ase contract and also pay the 
amount, if any, due and payable by the hirer to the owner under the 
contract on or befo re the termination of the contract.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if 
the hirer has already paid more than  half of the hire purchase price 
on or before the termin ation of the hire-purchase contract, the hirer 
shall not be required to pay any more amount, and if the hirer has 
paid less than half the amount, the hirer shall pay up to the half of the 
amount.  
(4) Nothing contained in sub-section (3) shall be deemed to 
release the hirer from payment of su ch other amount, charge or due 
as may be payable according to the hire-purchase contract. 
633. Right of hirer to transfer hi s or her right and interest: (1) The 
hirer may, with the consent of the owner of the hired goods, transfer 
to another person the right, interest  or liability in the goods hired by 
him or her according to the hire- purchase contract and such other
367 
 
right, interest or liability as may be accrued to him or her under such 
a contract.  
(2) The owner of goods shall, for the purposes of sub-section 
(1), give or refuse to give consent within fifteen  days of the date of 
the written request made by the hire r with the intention of getting 
consent from the owner to transfer his or her right, interest or 
liability to another person, and if consent cannot be obtained within 
such a period, the owner shall be deemed to have refused the consent. 
(3) If the owner of goods makes a refusal pursuant to sub-
section (2), the hirer shall, within thirty-five days, make a lawsuit in 
the court to have the refusal voided , and if the court issues an order 
to the effect that the refusal is not reasonable, the consent shall be 
deemed to have been obtained from the owner of goods. 
(4) If the right, interest or liability of the hirer is transferred 
to another person by operation of law, nothing contained in this 
Section shall be deemed to bar the exercise or performance of such 
right, interest or liability. 
634. To be liable for use of goods co ntrary to terms and conditions: If 
the hirer uses the goods under the hi re-purchase contract contrary to 
the terms and conditions of such a contract, the hirer shall be liable 
therefor. 
635. Information of actual condit ion of goods to be given:  If the 
owner of goods demands the hirer using the goods under the hire-
purchase contract to give info rmation as to th e place where the 
concerned goods are situated and th e state of benefits accrued from
368 
 
such goods, the hirer shall give information thereof to the owner 
within fifteen days. 
636. The owner of goods may terminate contract: (1) If the hirer 
defaults to pay more than one inst allment of the hire-purchase price 
to be paid to the owner of go ods according to th e hire-purchase 
contract, the owner of go ods shall be entitled to terminate the hire-
purchase contract at any time, by giving an advance notice as 
follows to the hirer:  
(a) If the installment is to be  paid within or less than 
an interval of one week , a period of one week. 
(b) In the cases other than that  referred to in clause (a), 
a period of fifteen days.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if the hirer makes payment of the in stallment and the interest, if any, 
to be accrued thereon acco rding to the hire-purch ase contract before 
the expiry of the period for giving an advance notice pursuant to the 
said sub-section, the hire-purchas e contract cannot be terminated.  
(3) If the hirer fails to perf orm the hire-pur chase contract 
or the terms and conditions referre d to in Section 629 or 635, the 
concerned owner of goods may term inate the hire-pur chase contract, 
by giving a notice of at  least fifteen days. 
(4) In the event of termination of the contract pursuant to 
sub-section (1) or (3), the ow ner of goods ma y exercise the 
following rights in relation to the hired goods:
369 
 
(a) To take back the goods wherever and in whatever 
situation they may be, an d if the goods cannot be 
so taken back, to forfeit them,  
(b) To determine the amount of  rent that he or she can 
recover out of the amount paid in lieu of such 
goods, and inform the hirer to take back of the 
exceeding amount, 
(c) To forfeit the amount, if any, taken as a deposit 
from the hirer at the tim e of hiring the goods, 
(d) To enter the house wh ere the goods are located 
with the assistance of po lice in the course of 
seizing the hired goods, 
(e) To recover compensation from the amount paid or 
make a claim for the loss or damage caused from 
the failure to return the hired goods in time or 
failure to perform the co ntract or the terms and 
conditions referred to in Section 629 or 635. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, if the hirer, surety or in vestor has already paid at least the 
basic price of the hi red goods, the owner of  the goods shall not 
entitled to terminate th e hire-purchase contract under this Section. 
Explanation:  For the purposes of this Section, the term 
"basic price" means three-fourths of the amount if the hire-price 
amounts to up to fifty thousand rupe es and at least half the price if 
the hire-purchase price is  more than that amount.
370 
 
(6) If the owner of goods te rminates the hire-purchase 
contract in contravention of sub-sect ion (5), the hirer or surety shall 
be in discharge of all liabilities to be fulfilled accordin g to the hire-
purchase contract and shall be en titled to refund the entire amount 
paid for the goods hi red by him or her.  
Provided that the hirer shall return the hired goods to the 
concerned owner of goods. 
(7) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (5), 
a restriction to terminate the hire -purchase contract  shall not be 
deemed to bar in any manner the ri ght to make a claim for the hire-
purchase price to be  received from the hi rer according to the 
contract. 
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Section, the owner of goods ma y terminate the hire-purchase 
contract entered into wi th the person who does not give information 
referred to in Section 635 and, if  any loss or damage is caused to 
such goods, make claim for the same as well. 
637. Rights of hirer in case of forfeiture of goods: (1) If the owner of 
the goods hired pursuant to clause (a) of sub- section (4) of Section 
636 forfeits the goods, the hirer shall be entitled to refund the 
amount paid in relation to the hire -purchase price up to the day of 
forfeiture and the amount equal to the price of the goods on the day 
of forfeiture from the owner.  
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term 
"price of the go ods on the day of forfe iture" means a sum that
371 
 
remains after making deduction of  the following amount or expense 
from the proceeds of sale  of the forfeited goods: 
(1) Reasonable expenses incu rred in course of the 
forfeiture of the goods, 
(2) Reasonable expenses incu rred in the storage and 
repair and maintenance of the goods until the sale 
of the goods, 
(3) Reasonable expenses incurred in the sale or 
otherwise transfer of the goods, 
(4) The amount paid for the taxes, charges, fees or 
dues, if any, outstanding and payable by the hirer 
for the goods according to  the laws in force, 
(2) The amount referred to in sub-section (1) shall be paid 
to the hirer within thir ty days after the date of forfeiture of the 
goods, and while making payment ther eafter, an interest at the rate 
of ten percent per year  shall also be paid. 
638. Status of hired goods in case  of hirer becoming bankrupt : (1) If 
the court holds, during the currency of a hire-p urchase contract, that 
the hirer has become a bankrupt or  is likely to be a bankrupt 
according to the laws in  force, and as a cons equence thereof, the 
liquidator or any other equally co mpetent person taking control of 
the property of such a person sha ll exercise and fulfill the same 
rights and obligations as the succe ssor has with regard to the goods 
under the hire-purchase contract.  
(2) If the hirer becomes bankrupt and the bankruptcy 
proceedings are under co nsideration in any cour t, the liquidator or
372 
 
the person exercising the right eq ual to that of the liquidator 
pursuant to sub-section (1) may, having obtained permission of 
such a court, transfer  the goods under the hire -purchase co ntract to 
another person in any manner, and if such goods ar e transferred in 
such a manner, the tran sferee of the go ods shall exercise and fulfill 
the rights and obligations under the hire-purchase cont ract as if the 
transferee were the hirer. 
639. Statute of  limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act 
done or action taken under this Ch apter may make a lawsuit within 
two years after the date of accrual of the cause of action.
373 
 
Chapter-14 
Provisions Relating to Wages 
640. Employment in work: (1) Any person who ha s attained at least 
fourteen years of age may be empl oyed in a work with his or her 
consent.  
Provided that a person who has not attained sixteen years of 
age shall not be em ployed in a hazardous business or work.  
(2) While employing any one pursuant to sub-section (1), 
the provisions of this Chapter shall be complied with, or caused to 
be complied with. 
641. Wages to be paid:   (1) While employing any one in any work 
pursuant to Section 640, the empl oyer shall have to  pay the wages 
in proportion to the work excep t in cases wher e the employee 
voluntarily agrees to work without wages.  
(2) While paying the wages purs uant to sub-section (1), if 
any particular rate of wages is specified with th e consent of the 
employer and the employee, the wages sha ll be paid accordingly 
and if no such rate is  specified, the wages for the work shall be paid 
according to the rate prevai ling in the place of work. 
(3) Except as otherwise agr eed upon between  the employer 
and the employee pursuant to sub-s ection (1) or (2), the wages shall 
be paid upon completion of the work.  
(4) While determining the wage s according to this Section, 
the wages shall be determined on the basis of each day of work 
except as otherwise agreed upon  between the employer and the 
employee.
374 
 
642. Provisions of safety measures to be made:  A person shall employ 
another person in a work only afte r making provisions of adequate 
safety measures to prev ent possible risks or da nger in view of the 
nature of work. 
643. Prohibition of employin g for more than eight hours:  (1) A 
person may not employ another person  in a work under  this Chapter 
normally for more than  eight hours a day.  
(2) If a person need to empl oy another in a work for a 
period more than that set forth in sub-section (1), th e consent of the 
employee shall be obtained, and while so employing him or her in 
the work, that person shall pay additional wa ges for each hour in 
proportion to a day by calcula ting eight hours as one day. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (2), 
the provisions of  that sub-sectio n shall not apply to the employment 
of a domestic helper. 
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter, the term 
“domestic helper” means a person so employed in work that he or 
she may be employed in a household work at any time as per 
necessity.  
644. Special provisions relatin g to domestic helpers:  (1) If a person 
employs another person as a domestic helper, the employer shall 
also comply with the following term s and conditions, in relation to 
the domestic helper: 
(a) To determine the wages monthly or annually basis 
and pay the wages,
375 
 
(b) To provide meals three tim es viz. in the morning, 
afternoon and evening, and clothes suitable to the 
weather, according to the capacity of the employer, 
(c) To provide facilities fo r using appropriate housing, 
toilet and bathroom fac ilities according to the 
capacity of the employer, 
(d) In the case of a domes tic helper below eighteen 
years of age, to make provision for his or her 
study at an appropriate time having regard to 
household work if he  or she so wishes, 
(e) To arrange for his or he r treatment if the domestic 
helper falls sick, 
Provided that the expe nses incurred in his 
or her treatment may not be deducted from his or 
her monthly or yearly wages. 
(f) Not to employ him or he r in work while he or she 
is sick, and, in other situations, not to employ him 
or her in such a work th at he or she may not be 
able to do due to the age,  ability or condition of 
him or her, 
(g) If he or she dies, to b ear the expenses incurred in 
the performance of hi s or her funeral and 
obsequies rites in a normal way, 
 
(h) Not to commit any inhumane or degrading 
treatment or domestic violence,
376 
 
(i) To comply with the other terms and conditions 
agreed upon between the employer and the 
domestic helper.  
(2) The expenses incurred unde r clauses (b), (c) and (d) of 
sub-section (1) may not be deduc ted from the monthly or yearly 
wages of the domestic helper. 
(3) If a person employs another person as a domestic 
helper, that person shall give wr itten information thereof to the 
concerned ward committee of the c oncerned Local Level within one 
month after the date of such an employment. 
645. Undertaken work not to  be left incomplete:  (1) If a person 
assumes responsibility to do or undertakes to do  any work, the 
person shall not leave the work in complete except for a reasonable 
ground. 
(2)  If a person leaves a work  incomplete as mentioned in 
sub-section (1), the person l eaving the work shall bear the 
obligation therefor. 
646. Wages to be paid to employee:  (1) The employer shall pay such 
wages as required to be paid for employment to the employee or 
any other person whom he or she has consented to. 
(2) If the employee dies prio r to the payment of wages 
pursuant to sub-section (1), the wage s he or she is entitled to shall 
be paid to his or her nearest successor. 
647. Statute of  limitation: A person who is aggrie ved in relation to any 
of the matters under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within three 
months after the date of  accrual of the cause of action in the case of
377 
 
Section 644, and within thirty-fiv e days in the cas e of the other 
matters.
378 
 
Chapter-15 
Provisions Relating  to Indirect or Quasi-Contracts 
648. Indirect or quasi-contrac t deemed to be made:  (1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter-2 of this Part, if any 
person does any certain, lawful, volu ntary or unilateral act that may 
give rise to a juridical relationshi p, an indirect or quasi-contract 
shall be deemed to be made. 
(2) If an indirect or quasi-con tract is made pursuant to sub-
section (1), an obligation under th is Chapter shall be created from 
the same fact. 
649. If other’s property managed voluntarily, not to be abandoned 
(negotiorum gestio ): If a person manages or  operates a business or 
property of another person on his or her own without information to, 
or authority from, that other pers on, the person shall, so long as 
such business or prop erty continues to exis t, not abandon such 
business or property without handin g it over to that other person, 
his or her successor or agent or un til that other pe rson removes him 
or her. 
650. To care (herbichar) or manage property taken in custody:  (1) If 
a person takes the custody of a property belonging to another 
person for its care or management, the person shall take care of and 
manage the property in good faith as if that were his or her own 
property.  
(2) If a person who takes th e custody of a property 
pursuant to sub-section (1) causes  loss or damage to the property
379 
 
with malafide intention or r ecklessly, the person shall pay 
compensation therefor. 
651. Not absolved from  obligation by delega tion of authority: If a 
person, who is entrusted by another person with a responsibility to 
do any act, delegates any or all of  his or her powe rs to another 
person to do that act in a manne r not to be prejudicial to the 
obligation vis-à-vis that other pe rson, the person shall not be free 
from his or her own obligation by the reason of such delegation.  
652. Reasonable costs to be paid  for saving property in times of 
disaster: If any person saves or protect s any property in times of 
disaster such as fire, flood, landslide, stor m and earthquake without 
giving information to its owner,  the owner of property shall 
reimburse the reasonable expenses incurred in saving or protecting 
such property to such a person. 
653. Right to claim reimbursement:  (1) If a person, in spite of being 
compelled by law to fulfil l any obligation, fulfills such obligation at 
his or her own expense and another person gets anything or benefit 
due to the fulfillment of such an  obligation or for any other reason,  
the person fulfilling such an obl igation may claim reimbursement of 
the amount incurred  therein from the person who so gets such thing 
or benefit. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if a person fulfills any obligati on for any illegal purpose, the person 
shall not be entitled to claim reimbursement from the same. 
654. Right to claim for  maintenance: If a person rears and maintains 
another person without giving information to th e person obliged to
380 
 
rear and maintain that other pers on, the person who so rears and 
maintains shall be entitled to cl aim an amount for such rearing and 
maintenance from the person  under such obligation. 
Provided that if he or she ma intains such a person by way of 
compassion or gratificat ion or with intention to  do so gratuitously, 
he or she shall not be entitle d to claim such an amount.  
655. Successor to reimburse expe nses incurred in obsequies of 
deceased: If any person performs the fu neral and obsequies acts of 
a deceased in accordance wi th his or her rites, tradition and culture, 
without giving informa tion to the successor to or close relative of 
the deceased and claims the expenses incurred  in the performance 
of such funeral and obsequies acts, the closest heir to, and, in the 
absence of the heir, the relative of, the deceased shall reimburse that 
person for the expenses.  
656. To bear expenses in maintenance (palan poshan) of incompetent 
person: If a person obli ged to maintain (palan poshan) or take care 
of (herbichar) a person of unsound mind, a person with physical 
infirmity or a helpless minor having  no income of his or her own 
refuses to maintain such a pers on and any other person maintains 
(palan poshan) or takes care of (herbichar) him or her, that other 
person shall be entitled to clai m reimbursement for the expenses 
incurred therein fr om the person under such an obligation.  
657. Treatment expenses to be reimbursed:  If a person becomes 
seriously ill owing to an accident or other reason and any other 
person, except his or her heir living  in the joint family, relative or 
close person, conducts, or causes to  be conducted me dical treatment 
of him or her voluntarily, the heir , relative or clos e person to him
381 
 
shall reimburse that other person who has conducted, or caused to 
be conducted, the treatment for the expenses incu rred in such 
treatment. 
  Provided that if the treatment has been conducted, or caused 
to be conducted, with the intent ion of doing so gratuitously, the 
expenses need not be reimbursed. 
658. To bear expenses made  by public bodies: If a person voluntarily 
omits to follow the nece ssary health or safety  measures required to 
be followed according to law for the protect ion of body, life or 
property of him or her or of the public, and if any government or 
public body follows, or causes to be followed, such  measures, the 
person shall pay reasonable expenses  incurred for th at purpose even 
if he or she does not agree to foll ow, or cause to be followed, such 
measures. 
659. To reimburse amount pa id by person interested in: If a contract 
is so concluded that a person pr omises to pay any amount which 
another person is bound by law to pay and if that person fails to pay 
it, and other person who has to pay,  pays it, the person concluding a 
contract shall reim burse such an amoun t to that person. 
660. To pay price or remuneration: If a person delivers any goods to 
or does any work for another person,  that other person shall pay the 
price of such goods or  service or remuneration of the work to the 
person. 
661. Right to recover pri ce of goods or services: If a person has 
supplies any goods or se rvice to another person who is incapable of 
conclusion of a contr act under law or any one  whom such incapable
382 
 
person is legally responsible to support, the person may recover the 
price of such goods or service from  the person recei ving such goods 
or service. 
662. Property in custody to be  kept as bailed property:  If a person 
keeps in any manner in his or her custody property owned by 
another as may be retained accord ing to law, such a person shall 
keep such property as a property under bailment. 
663. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggr ieved from any act 
done or action taken under this Ch apter may make a lawsuit within 
two years after the date of accrual of the cause of action.
383 
 
Chapter-16 
Provisions Relating to Unjust Enrichment 
664. Unjust enrichment to be deemed:  (1) If any person gets any benefit 
or advantage from another person, without for the reason of doing 
any lawful act or fulfilling any obligation, the person who so gets the 
benefit or advantage shall be deemed to have got an unjust 
enrichment. 
(2) A person shall be deemed  to have got an unjust 
enrichment under sub-section (1) in any of the following 
circumstances: 
(a) If there is an increment in his or her property or 
decrease in his or her liability, 
(b) If he or she receives a service from another or causes 
another to do a work, 
(c) If other’s property is used for him or her. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) 
or (2), even if any person gets  any goods, service, benefit or 
advantage in any manner, exce pt in any of the following 
circumstances, he or she shall be deemed to have got an unjust 
enrichment: 
(a) If any goods, service, be nefit or advantage can be 
obtained from any person under a law or contract, 
(b) If the person, from whom any goods, service, benefit 
or advantage have been obtained,  has agreed with 
free consent not to take back or reimburse the same.
384 
 
(4) In determining whether or not and to what extent any 
person has got an unjust enrichment under this Chapter, no 
consideration shall be granted to any disadvantage or loss or damage 
caused thereby to him or her after he or she has got the unjust 
enrichment. 
(5) If a person gets an unjust enrichment pursuant to this 
Section, the person shall bear the obligation under this Chapter. 
665. Thing taken by mistake to be returned ( solutio indebiti ): If any 
person takes or receives by mistake any goods which he or she is not 
entitled to take or receive, he or  she shall return the goods to the 
person from whom he or she has taken or received them. 
666. To pay back debt paid by mistake: If a person pays a debt to 
another person by mistake because the person thinks that he or she is 
bound to do so and proves that he or she is not bound to pay such 
debt, that other person who receive s such amount shall return it to 
him or her. 
667. To return goods or amount take n with malafide intention and 
benefits accrued therefrom: (1) If any person receives from another 
person with malafide intention any amount or goods in which he or 
she has no  claim, he or she shall return to that other person such 
amount or goods and the interest to be chargeable on such amount 
under the law or the advantage or  return accrued from such goods, 
from the date of receipt of such am ount or goods to the date of their 
return.
385 
 
(2) If the amount or goods received pursuant to sub-section 
(1) are lost or damaged for any reas on, he or she shall also pay the 
compensation therefor. 
668. To pay  debt paid by third person:  If a debt payable by a person is 
paid by a third person without th e debtor's knowledge, the debtor 
shall pay the debt to the person who has so paid it. 
669. Right to claim reimbursement if  payable tax paid by another 
person: If a tax payable by a person is  paid by anothe r person, that 
other person who has so paid th e tax may claim reimbursement 
therefor from the person who is obliged to pay it. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term “tax” 
means any type of government fee, charge, tariff, duty and fine, and 
also includes a local tax. 
670. Goods found may be kept upon gi ving information to police: (1) 
If any person finds any goods in a ny manner, he or she may, having 
given a notice thereof, along with actual description thereof, to the 
police, safely retain such goods w ith him or her until the concerned 
owner is found. 
(2) The concerned owner shall bear the expenses incurred 
in finding the owner of goods refe rred to in sub-section (1) and 
retaining such goods, and the finde r of goods may retain the goods 
until the payment of such expenses. 
(3) If no person appears to claim the goods retained 
pursuant to sub-section (1) until th ree years, the goods shall belong 
to the finder.
386 
 
671. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrie ved from any act done 
or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within two 
years after the date of accrual of the cause of action.
387 
 
Chapter-17 
Provisions Relating to Torts 
672. Tort deemed to be committed:   (1) No person sh all cause loss or 
damage, in any manner, to another pe rson's body, life or property or 
legally protected right or interest  by the reason of  commission or 
omission done, whether by any defaul t, negligence or recklessness 
on the part of himself or herself or  of any one else to whom he or 
she must bear obligation acco rding to this Chapter.  
(2) If the parties do not ha ve any prior contractual 
relationship in relation to any comm ission or omission referred to in 
sub-section (1), the loss or damage resulted from such a 
commission or recklessness sha ll be deemed to be a tort. 
Explanation: For the purposes of th is Chapter, the term 
"omission" means the state of fa ilure of a person to do any act 
which the person is bound to do. 
(3) A person who commits a to rt pursuant to sub-section 
(1) shall bear liability  under this Chapter. 
673. Parents to bear  liability: The father and mother jointly living with 
a minor below fourteen y ears of age, or if th ere is no father or 
mother, the person who exercises paternal authority over him or her 
shall be liable for a tort committed by such a minor. 
674. Guardian or curator to bear liability: The guardian or curator of 
a person of unsound mind shall be  responsible for and accordingly 
bear liability for any loss or da mage caused by such a person.  
675. Employer to bear liability:  (1) Any person, firm, company or 
organization who employs a domes tic helper, other worker or
388 
 
employee in a work shall be liable for the loss or damage to another 
person, if any, result ed from any act done in  good faith by such a 
helper, worker or empl oyee in the course of  doing such a work. 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
the worker or employee shall be personally liab le for any act which 
he or she has done negligently or dishonestly. 
676. Owner of animal to bear liabilit y for loss or da mage caused by 
animal:  The owner of an animal whic h is kept by or under the 
control of him or her shall be liab le for any loss or damage caused 
by the animal to any one.  
Provided that the owner of anim al shall not be liable for any 
loss or damage caused by the an imal while being appropriately 
controlled by the owner by taki ng adequate safety measures 
according to its behavior or caused as a result of any act, default or 
negligence of the loss or damage  sustaining person himself or 
herself. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term 
"animal" means a domestic animal or  wildlife or avian of any type 
under one's control, and also in cludes a domestic, reptile or wild 
avian as well. 
677. House-owner to bear liability for loss or damage caused by its 
collapse: The concerned house-owner sha ll be liable for any kind of 
loss or damage, if any, caused to any one as a result of the collapse 
of the house, in whole or in part, or by an y part of the house, 
whether during, or after the completion of, its construction.
389 
 
678. Owner of property to bear liability:  The concerned property 
owner shall be liable for the loss or damage, if any, caused to any 
one as a result of the following: 
(a) An explosion owing to a failure to adopt safety 
measures properly a ccording to the natu re of a machine, 
equipment or engine, 
(b) A fire or explosion owing to a failure to adopt safety 
measures properly according to the nature of any 
inflammable or expl osive substance, 
(c) Emission of excessive sm oke, noise by any industrial 
enterprise in contravention of the specified standards, 
(d) A tree lying down or laid down on any highway, road, 
street or way except due to a disaster or an act by any 
third person, 
(e) Discharge of any infected or toxic substance or 
communicable disease carry ing substance openly 
through a canal, ditch, pi pe or sewerage, without 
adopting precaution ary measures properly, in 
contravention of the specified standards. 
679. House-head to bear liability:  The concerned hou se-head shall be 
liable for the loss or damage, if any,  caused to any one as a result of 
any kind of solid waste or g oods thrown from the house. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section,- 
(1) "House" means  a house or shed, and also includes the 
structure of a house.
390 
 
(2) "House-head" means a pers on who acts as the chief of 
family, and also includes, in the case of a tenant 
renting other’s house, the pers on who acts as the chief 
of the tenant’s family. 
680. To bear liability for trespass: A person who commits trespass to 
other's property shall be liable fo r any loss or damage resulted from 
the trespass.  
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term 
"trespass" means an unlawful entry into, taking possession of 
products of, unauthorized damage to, interference in, or unlawful 
encroachment on, a proper ty that is under entitl ement, possession or 
ownership of another person, in th e case of an imm ovable property, 
and forcibly taking into custody, ta king away, taking the advantage 
arising out of, or causing obstructio n or hindrance in  the use of, the 
property under entitlement, posse ssion or ownership of another 
person, in the case of a movable pr operty, and also includes an act 
of taking control of any type of property in an una uthorized manner. 
681. To bear liability jointly: (1) If more than one  person commit any 
act to be deemed a to rt under this Chapter,  each of such persons 
shall, except as otherwise proved, be jointly and severally liable for 
any damage caused by that act, in proportion to the culpability of 
the tort committed by each person.  
(2)  If separate liability can be  determined in proportion to 
the culpability of tort pursuant to sub-section (1 ), liability shall be 
borne accordingly, and if such de termination cannot be made, all 
persons responsible for th e tort shall bear liabili ty on an equal basis.
391 
 
682. Compensation to be paid for liability:  (1) While bearing liability 
for a tort committed under this Ch apter, the person who commits 
the tort shall pa y compensation.  
  (2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if any tort is committed under th is Chapter as a result of any 
omission, fault, recklessness or negligence of the injured person 
also, the quantum of  such compensation shall be lesser. 
(3) The compensation referred to in sub-section (1) shall 
be limited to the actual loss or  damage, and remote or unactual 
compensation shall no t be recoverable. 
(4) The compensation may be of  any type, in the form of 
either cash or ki nd or service. 
(5) If any loss or damage is caused under this Chapter, a 
person who suffers shall be enti tled to claim for compensation, 
subject to this Chapter. 
(6) If a claim is made for co mpensation pursuant to sub-
section (5), the court ma y order reasonable comp ensation to be paid. 
683. Not to bear liability if se parate provision is made:  (1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this  Chapter, if a 
tort for which liability is to be borne under this  Chapter is treated as 
a criminal offence under a law, or this Act or other law contains a 
separate provision or  provides for a separate legal remedy in 
relation to such a tort, no liabilit y under this Chapter may be borne.  
(2) Subject to sub-section (1),  if the alleged tortfeasor 
proves that the tort for which liabili ty is to be borne under this 
Chapter was resulted not from his or her negligence, recklessness,
392 
 
fault or omission but from any other reason, he or she shall be 
released from the liabili ty for such a tort. 
684. Statute of  limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act 
done or action taken under this Ch apter may make a lawsuit within 
six months after the date on whic h such an act was done or action 
was taken.
393 
 
Chapter-18 
Provisions Relating to Liabil ity for Defective Products 
685. To be liable for defective product:  (1) No person shall produce 
any defective product and sell or dist ribute, or cause to be sold or 
distributed, any defec tive goods or service. 
(2) The producer of a defectiv e product referred to in sub-
section (1) shall bear liability u nder this Chapter for the loss or 
damage, if any, caused to the body, li fe or property of any person as 
a result of the consumption of such  product sold or distributed by 
any one. 
 Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,- 
(1) "Defective product" means any goods or service which, 
for any of the following r easons, lack the minimum 
safety measures that a pe rson of general prudence 
reasonably expects while consuming any product: 
(a) Defective design, manu facturing, processing or 
installation, 
(b) Defective packing, safety or storage, 
(c) Defective presentation, 
(d) Lacking adequate meas ures or precautions to 
control the potential risk  or danger according to 
the nature of the pro duced good or service. 
(2) "Producer" means a produ cer who ultimately produces, 
sells and distributes any def ective goods or service, and 
also includes the following person:
394 
 
(a) The distributor or seller if the producer cannot be 
traced out, 
(b) In the case of any im ported product, the importer 
of the defective product or  the distributor or seller 
of such product. 
(3) "Good" means any industr ial product for consumption 
by the public. 
686. Claimant to prove that product is defective: If any person makes 
a claim that any good or  service is a defective product and he or she 
has suffered injury to his or her body, life or property from the 
consumption thereof, he or she shall prove that  there is the 
relationship between such defective product and the injury, and that 
such injury has resulted solely  from the consum ption of such 
product. 
687. To be in discharge of liability:  Notwithstanding anything 
contained in Section 685, the produ cer shall not be liable if he or 
she proves any of th e following facts: 
(a) He or she has not produ ced, sold or distributed the 
defective product, 
(b) The goods or service th at he or she produced, 
imported, sold or distribu ted was not defective at 
the time of production, import, sale or distribution 
or it became defective afte r the sale or distribution, 
(c) The goods or service that  he or she produced has 
not been marketed, sold  or distributed,
395 
 
(d) The injury has been cau sed due to the consumer's 
failure to comply with the directions to be 
complied with while co nsuming the produced 
goods or service, 
(e) The injury has been cau sed because the consumer 
has not properly consum ed the product or has 
consumed it otherwise, 
(f) One had no scientific or technical knowledge at 
the time of production or distribution of the goods 
or service that such goods or service was defective, 
(g) Information was given at the time of sale of the 
product, from which the injury has been caused, 
that it might cause injury if not consumed properly, 
(h) The goods or service ha s been consumed despite 
knowing or having a reason able reason to know 
that it might cause loss or damage. 
688. Quantum of liability may be reduced:  Notwithstanding anything 
contained elsewhere in th is Chapter, if it is pr oved that the injury 
has been caused due to both the producer and the consumer of a 
defective product, the producer 's liability may be reduced 
proportionately.  
Provided that if such injury has resulted in a loss or damage 
to a third party, the quantum of li ability may not be reduced in the 
case of such a party. 
689. Product not deemed to be defective:  Goods or service consumed 
by a person shall not be considered to be a de fective product merely
396 
 
by the reason that any goods or servi ce of quality higher  than that of 
such goods or service is available in the market. 
690. Not to prejudice other right:  Nothing contained in this Chapter 
shall prejudice the right, interest or claim available under a law or 
contract to any person whose b ody, life or property has been 
affected from a de fective product. 
691. Statute of  limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act 
done or action taken under this Ch apter may make a lawsuit within 
one year from the date on which such an act was done or action 
taken.
397 
 
Part-6 
Provisions Relating to Pr ivate International Law 
692. Provisions of th is Part to apply: (1) The provisions of this Part 
shall apply to any matter relating to private legal relationship 
involving a foreigner, foreign obj ect or any act done in a foreign 
country. 
(2) Without prejudice to the ge nerality of su b-section (1), 
the provisions of this sub-section shall apply, in particular, to the 
following matters: 
(a) Legal status of a foreig ner and his or her capacity, 
(b) Matters relating to matrim onial relationship, paternal 
and maternal and other family relationship or partition 
or succession, with at least one of the related parties 
whereof being a foreigner, or  the place of execution of 
any act or action related ther eto being situated outside 
Nepal, 
(c) Matter relating to a prop erty situated in a foreign 
country, with at least on e of the concerned parties 
being a foreigner, 
(d) Matter relating to a contract ual or non-contractual right 
or obligation, with at least one party being a foreigner,  
(e) Matter relating to a contract  made in a foreign country.
398 
 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Part, the term 
“foreigner” means a fo reign natural pe rson or body corporate, and 
also includes a foreign state. 
693. Legal capacity of fo reigner to be determined:  (1) The legal 
capacity of any foreign natura l person shall be determined 
according to the law of  the country of his or her nationality. 
(2) If the nationality of a fore ign natural person cannot be 
ascertained pursuant to sub-section (1), his or her capacity shall be 
determined according to the law of the country of his or her 
habitual residence, and even if su ch residence canno t be ascertained, 
according to the law of the country where he or she is residing for 
the time being. 
(3) The legal capacity or status  of a body co rporate shall 
be determined accordin g to the law of the country where it is 
registered, if the country of regi stration cannot be so ascertained, 
according to the law of the country where the h eadquarters of such 
body is located, and if  even such a country cannot be ascertained, 
according to the law of the countr y where the place of transaction 
of such a body is located. 
694. Presumption of disappearan ce or death of foreigner:  (1) If a 
presumption of the disappearance or death of a foreigner has to be 
made, the matter shall be determin ed according to the law of the 
country of his or her nationality. 
(2) If the nationality of a fo reigner cannot be ascertained 
pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall be dete rmined according to the
399 
 
law of the country of his or her habitual resi dence, and even if such 
residence cannot be ascer tained, according to th e law of the country 
of his or her residence immediat ely before making presumption of 
his or her disappearance or death. 
695. Successor to be determined according to foreign law:  While 
determining the successor  to a foreigner residing  in Nepal when his 
or her property is open for succession, th e successor shall be 
determined according to the law of the country of his or her 
nationality, if such country cannot be determ ined, according to the 
law of the country of his or her habitual residence, and if even such 
residence cannot be ascer tained, according to th e law of the country 
where he or she is resi ding for the time being. 
696. Determination of succession of deceased:  (1) If succession is 
open because of the death of any foreigner in Nepal and it is 
therefore necessary to determine his or her su ccessor to the property 
situated in Nepal and the order of  preference thereo f, it shall be 
determined according to the law of the country of his or her 
nationality at the time of his or her death. 
(2) If the law referred to in  sub-section (1) cannot be 
ascertained, it shall be determin ed according to the law of the 
country of his or her habitual re sidence at the time of his or her 
death, and if even su ch country cannot be as certained, according to 
the law of Nepal. 
697. Determination of the natu re of corporate body:  Question as 
regards whether a company, foundat ion or other corp orate body is
400 
 
public or private sha ll be determined accordi ng to the law of the 
country of incorporation of such  a company, foundation or body, 
and if such law cannot be ascertained, according to the law of the 
country where the regi stered office or head quarters of such a 
company, foundation or co rporate body is situated. 
698. Regulation of property:  (1) Succession to a movable property 
shall be governed by the law of th e country of habitual residence of 
the deceased at the time of his or her death. 
(2) Succession to an imm ovable property shall be 
governed by the law of the country where such proper ty is situated. 
699. Citizen of Nepal to follow la w of Nepal while concluding 
marriage abroad:  (1) A citizen of Nepal shall, while concluding a 
marriage in a foreign country, comply with su ch competency, 
qualification and conditions for marri age as specified by the law of 
Nepal. 
 (2) The formalities to be fu lfilled by a citizen of Nepal 
while concluding a marri age in a foreign country shall be governed 
by the law of the country wher e the marriage is concluded. 
 Provided that while conc luding a marriage at an 
embassy or consulate general of Ne pal situated in a foreign country, 
the formalities referred to in the law of Nepal shall be followed. 
(3) A marriage concluded in co ntravention of sub-sections 
(1) and (2) shall not be recognized in Nepal. 
700. Foreigner to follow law of hi s or her country while concluding 
marriage in Nepal:  (1) While concluding a marriage between
401 
 
foreigners or between a foreigner and a citizen  of Nepal in Nepal, 
each person entering into marriage shall comply wi th the capacity, 
qualification and condition as speci fied by the law of the respective 
country of his or her nationality.  
(2) The formalities to be fulf illed by the foreigners while 
concluding marriage in Nepal shall be governed by the law of Nepal. 
Provided that while concludi ng a marriage at a foreign 
embassy or consulate general situated in Nepal, the formalities 
referred to in the law of the con cerned country shall be fulfilled. 
(3) A marriage concluded in co ntravention of sub-sections 
(1) and (2) shall not be recognized in Nepal. 
701. Consequence of marri age to be accordin g to law of one’s 
country:  (1) The matrimonial relatio nship between the couple after 
the marriage and the consequence of  marriage shall be determined 
according to the law of the country of their nationality if both 
spouses have the same nationality , and if the country of their 
nationality is not the same, accord ing to the law of the country of 
their habitual residence and if even  such a country is not the same, 
according to the law of the countr y of their reside nce for the time 
being. 
(2) If the consequence of ma rriage cannot be determined 
pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall be dete rmined according to the 
law of the country of their marriage.  
702. Paternal authority to be govern ed by law of the country of 
nationality: (1) The relationship betwee n father, mother and son,
402 
 
daughter including paternal auth ority shall be governed by the law 
of the country of nation ality of the son or da ughter, as the case may 
be. 
(2) If the law referred to in sub-section (1) is not 
ascertained, it shall be  governed by the la w of the country of 
habitual residence of th e father, mother and, if even su ch country 
cannot be ascertained, by  the law of the country of their residence 
for the time being. 
703. To be governed by th e law of the country of nationality of 
adoptive person:  Subsequent to the adopti on of a son or daughter, 
the relationship between the adoptiv e person and the adopted son or 
daughter shall be governed by the law of the countr y of nationality 
of the adoptive person, and if su ch law cannot be ascertained, by 
the law of the country of habitual residence of the adopt ive person, 
and if even such law cannot be  ascertained, by the law of the 
country where the adoptiv e parents are habitual ly spending marital 
life. 
704. Determination of guardi anship or curatorship:  (1) The 
guardianship or curatorship of an  incompetent or quasi-competent 
person shall be determined accord ing to the law of the country of 
nationality of that person.  
(2) If the country referred to  in sub-sectio n (1) cannot be 
ascertained, it shall be determined acco rding to the law of the 
country of his or her habitual resi dence, and if even such country
403 
 
cannot be ascertained, acco rding to the law of th e country of his or 
her habitual residence for the time being.   
(3) The relationship between the guardian or curator and 
the person under his or her guard ianship or curatorship shall be 
determined according to the law of the country of the guardian or 
curator or the law of the country where the guardian  or curator is 
appointed as such. 
Provided that if the habitual residence of the person who is 
under guardianship or cura torship is in Nepal, it  shall be determined 
according to the law of Nepal. 
705. To be determined accord ing to the law of residence: (1) The 
matter of separation of bread and board shall be governed by the 
law of the country of habitual residence of the married couple.  
(2) If, in governing the matter pursuant to sub-section (1), 
the country of habitual residence of the couple is not the same, it 
shall be governed by the law of th e last country of their habitual 
residence, and if even such a co untry cannot be as certained, by the 
law of the court where the case of alimony is sub judice. 
706. Divorce effected abroad  to be recognized:  If a divorce is effected 
between the citizens of Nepal or between a citizen of Nepal and a 
foreigner in a foreign country, such a divorce shall, if effected in 
accordance with the law of that country, be recognized and 
enforced in Nepal in accordance with th e law of Nepal. 
707. Content of ownership to be de termined according to law of 
country where propert y is situated:  (1) The content of ownership
404 
 
or possession of any pr operty shall be determined according to the 
law of the country where su ch property is situated. 
(2) A question as regards the maintenance or termination 
of ownership in an immovable property shall be determined 
according to the law of the country wher e such property is situated. 
708. Goods to be governed by  law of destination:  Any goods in transit 
in the course of carr iage shall be governed  by the law of their 
destination. 
709. Governing law of  contract to be as de termined by parties:  (1) 
The governing law of any contract shall be as determined in the 
contract by its parties. 
(2) If no law is determined pu rsuant to sub-section (1), 
such a contract shall be  governed by the law of the country of its 
performance, and if even such a country cannot be ascertained, by 
the law of the country where it was concluded. 
Provided that a co ntract concluded in Nepal shall be 
governed by the law of Nepal. 
710. Deed executed abro ad to be recognized:  The validity of any 
contract or deed executed outs ide Nepal shall be determined 
according to the law of the country where it has been executed, and 
such a contract or d eed shall be deemed la wful and recognized in 
Nepal if it has been duly execut ed in accordance with the law of 
that country. 
711. To be governed by law of  nationality of donor:  (1) The matter 
concerning validity of a donation or gift shall be governed by the
405 
 
law of the country  of donor's nationality ex isting when the donation 
or gift was made. 
(2) If the formalities are comple ted according to the law of 
the country where a donation or gift  is given, the donation or gift 
shall be  deemed to be duly given. 
712. Determination of  liability for tort:  (1) While determining the 
liability for an act which, acco rding to law constitutes a tort, 
involving a foreigner,  foreign object or act  done in a foreign 
country, it shall be determined acco rding to the law of the country 
where such an act ha s been taken place. 
(2) If any act referred to in sub-section (1) originates in 
one country and results in conseq uence in another country, the 
liability shall be determined acco rding to the law of the country 
where the consequen ce so results.   
(3) If the liability cannot be  determined pursuant to sub-
section (2), it shall be determin ed according to the law of the 
country where the tortious  act has been committed. 
713. Liability for quasi-cont ract or unjust enrichment:  The liability 
for a quasi-contract or unjust enrichment shall be determined 
according to the law of the country wher e such an act has been done. 
714. Other matters to be dete rmined according to recognized 
principles of private international law:  (1) While determining 
any matter that is not dealt with in  this Part involv ing a foreigner, 
foreign object or act done in a foreign country, such a matter shall 
be determined accordin g to the law of Nepa l, if Law of Nepal
406 
 
provides separate prov ision in relation to that matter, and failing 
such separate provisi on, according to the rec ognized principles of 
private international law. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section (1), 
if all parties of the relevant matter so agree, the matter referred to in 
sub-section (1) shall be determined  according to the law of Nepal. 
715. In case of doub le nationality, law of country of habitual 
residence to be applied:  (1) If this Part cont ains a provision to the 
effect that any matter is determ ined according to  the law of the 
country of nationality and a person is having nationality of two or 
more countries at the same time, his or her nationality shall be 
determined according to the law of the county of his or her 
nationality, where he or she habitually resides. 
(2) If such a matter cannot be determined according to the 
law of the country referred to in  sub-section (1), it shall be 
determined according to the law of the country of his or her 
nationality, to which he or sh e has most closest connection. 
Provided that in the case of  a person who holds also the 
citizenship of Nepal or who has habi tual residence in Nepal or is a 
non-resident Nepali citizen, it shal l be determined according to the 
law of Nepal. 
(3) If the matter referred to in  sub-section (1) concerns a 
refugee or stateless person, it sh all be determined according to the 
law of the country of his or her habitual residence, and if even such
407 
 
a law cannot be determin ed, according to  the law of the country of 
his or her residence for the time being. 
716. Power to give permission fo r trial of case by foreign court:  (1) If 
both parties to a case which i nvolves a foreign party and is sub 
judice in a court of Nepal make a joint petition to the court, 
specifying the reason th at it is appropriate and practicable for that 
case to be resolved by a court of the country of residence of such 
party and the matter is found reas onable upon examination of the 
petition, the court may give permission for th e proceedings of the 
case by the foreign court as demanded by the parties to  such a case. 
(2) Once the court has given pe rmission for the proceeding 
of a case by a foreign court pu rsuant to sub-section (1), no 
proceeding shall be made  again by a court of  Nepal in the same 
matter. 
717. Power to adjourn case sub judice  in court of Nepal:  If any case 
between the parties is sub judice  in a court of Nepal and a case is 
running also in a fore ign court between such parties in the same 
matter, and the parties, having co nsidered that th e case pending in 
the court of Nepal is likely to be  directly affected by a judgment to 
be made in the case between them  running in the foreign court, 
apply for the adjournmen t of the case running in Nepal, the court 
may adjourn such a case until th eir case pending in the foreign 
court is adjudged.
408 
 
718. Court of Nepal to  have jurisdiction: A court of Nepal shall have 
jurisdiction to adjudicate the pr oceedings and settle any disputes 
arising in connection with  the following matters:  
(a) A matter between the foreigners  who reside in Nepal or 
between a foreigner and a c itizen of Nepal, that is 
governed by this Act or other law, 
(b) A matter of a case of which a foreigner residing in Nepal 
is a defendant, 
(c) A matter as regards the succ ession of a foreigner who 
resided in Nepal and had proper ty in Nepal at the time of 
his or her death, 
(d) A matter concerning payment to be made in Nepal on a 
financial transaction or deal ing made abroad between a 
citizen of Nepal and a foreigner, 
(e) A matter between foreigners or  between a foreigner and a 
citizen of Nepal, concerning a property situated in Nepal, 
(f) A matter concerning a contract  concluded in or to be 
performed in Nepal between foreigners or to which at 
least one party is a citizen or body corporate of Nepal, 
(g) A matter concerning a tort, quasi-contract or unjust 
enrichment committed outside Nepal, where both parties 
are citizens of Nepal or fore igners who have habitual 
residence in Nepal,
409 
 
(h) A matter to be adjudicated by  a court of Nepal under sub-
section (2) of Section 699. 
719. Other matters concern ing a case may also be  settled by court of 
Nepal: If it appears that any other matter related to any case 
involving a foreigner instituted in a court of Nepal under its 
jurisdiction to settle the main di spute should also be settled, the 
court may assume its jurisdiction ov er that matter also and settle it 
accordingly. 
720. Treaty, if any, to apply: If any treaty to which Nepal is a party 
contains a separate provision on a ny matter set forth in this Part, 
nothing contained in this Part  shall affect such provision.  
721. Provisions of this  Part not to apply: (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained elsewhere in this Part, if the application of any legal 
provision under this Part in Nepal wo uld be contrary to public order, 
the provision contai ned in this Part shall no t be applicable in such 
circumstance. 
(2) If there arises a circumstan ce referred to in sub-section 
(1), the matters contained in this  Part shall be governed by other 
linking criteria, and if such crite ria cannot be determined, by the 
law of Nepal.