www.lawcommission.gov.np 
1 
 
The Labour Act, 2017 (2074) 
                                                                                 Date of Authenticatio n:  
   4 September 2017 ( 19 Bhadra 2074 )  
 
Act number 14 of the year 2017 (2074) 
An Act Made for the Amendment and Consolidation of the Laws Relating to 
Labour 
Preamble:  
Whereas, it is expedient to amend and consolidate t he laws relating to labour in 
order to provide for rights, interests and benefits  of labours, develop good labour relations 
by making explicit provisions on the rights and duties of labours and employers and 
increase productivity by ending all forms of labour exploitation; 
Now, therefore, the Legislature-Parliament referred  to in clause (1) of Article 296 
of the Constitution of Nepal has enacted this Act.  
 
Chapter-1 
Preliminary 
1. Short title and commencement:  (1) This Act may be cited as the "Labour Act, 
2017 (2074)."  
(2) This Act shall commence forthwith.  
2. Definitions:  Unless the subject or the context otherwise requir es, in this Act:  
(a) "Basic remuneration" means the basic remunerati on to be received 
by a labour for employment, and this term also include a mount of 
increment in remuneration after completion of one ye ar of the 
employment period. 
(b) "Chief Executive" means a person who bears the final responsibility 
for the activities of the enterprise.  
(c) "Workplace" means the place or location where a labou r works, and 
this term also includes a place or situation where a labour has to stay 
or visit in the course of the work. 
(d) "Office" means the Labour Office.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
2 
 
(e) “Lockout" means the closure of any enterprise or workplace by the 
employer to prevent fully or partly the labours from performing their 
regular work .  
Provided that th is term does not refer to a situation where the 
labours are held in reserve or where the work is st opped because of 
the occurrence of an immediate danger. 
(f) “Prescribed” or “ as prescribed” means prescribed or as prescribed 
in the rules framed under th is Act, and this term also includes a 
notice published in the Nepal Gazette as provided f or in this Act or 
the rules framed under this Act.  
(g) "Inspector" means the senior labour inspector, lab our inspector, 
senior occupational safety and health inspector and occupational 
safety and health inspector, and this term also incl udes any other 
employee deputed for inspection.  
(h) "Council" means the Central Labour Advisory Council  formed 
pursuant to Section 102.  
(i) "Remuneration" means the basic remuneration to whi ch a labour is 
entitled, and this term also includes an allowance.   
(j) "Enterprise" means any company, private firm, part nership firm, 
cooperative organization or association or other or ganization which 
is established, incorporated, registered or formed or operat ed in 
accordance with the prevailing law with the objecti ve to carry on 
any industry, business or service, with or without p rofit motive.  
(k) "Ministry" means the Ministry of Labour and Employmen t, 
Government of Nepal.  
(l) "Main employer" means an employer who employs labours  through 
a labour provider.  
(m) "Employer" means any person or enterprise that empl oys labours, 
and this term also includes a manager in the case of an enterprise, 
and a labour provider in the case of a labour supplied pu rsuant to 
this Act.  
(n) "Employment contract" means a n agreement entered into between 
an employer and a labour in relation to the service,  conditions and
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
3 
 
benefits of employment, and this term also includes the letter of 
appointment given by the employer to the labour .  
(o) "Employment period" means the period during which a  labour is 
employed with an employer, and this term also include s the 
following period:  
  (1) Period held in the reserve, 
  (2) Period of leave with remuneration, 
(3) Period of unpaid leave taken for maternity or 
maternity care, 
(4) Period of leave taken for medical treatment in cas e of 
accident during or while working for the employer. 
(p) "By-law" means the by-law relating to conditions of service of the 
labour s framed by an enterprise pursuant to Section 108, and  this 
term also includes the financial administration by-law of the 
enterprise.  
(q) "Department" means the Department of Labour .  
(r) "Manager" means the chief executive of an enterpris e. and this term 
also includes the chief of any section or unit so ap pointed as taking 
or exercising the final responsibility or authority.   
(s) "Managerial level labour" means a labour appointed  to a post at the 
managerial or higher level thereof entrusting the a uthority to 
evaluate, control and supervise the work of labours  on behalf of the 
employer, and this term also includes the manager.  
(t) "Social Security Fund" means the Social Security Fun d established 
pursuant to the prevailing law.  
(u) "Collective agreement" means an agreement entered into between 
the employer or employers' association and the trade union or 
Collective Bargaining Committee on remuneration, co nditions of 
service, benefits of the labours or matters of common c oncern to the 
employer and the labours .  
(v) "Collective Bargaining Committee" means the Collec tive 
Bargaining Committee referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 116.  
(w) "Labour Court" means the Labour Court formed pursua nt to Section 
151.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
4 
 
(x) "Labour" means a worker or employee or a person emp loyed with 
any job title who performs a physical or intellectual work for the 
employer.  
(y) "Labour supplier" means a person or body having o btained the 
license pursuant to Chapter 11 to supply labours. 
(z) "Strike" means a situation where labours collectiv ely refuse to 
perform their regular work partially or completely.  
Provided that a situation where labours are on leav e or 
stopped the work as a result of the occurrence of a n immediate 
danger or have become unable to attend or perform t he work due to 
a situation beyond the control of labours shall not be  considered as 
a strike. 
 
Chapter-2 
Basic Provisions Relating to Labours 
3. To remain as minimum standard s: ( 1) This Act shall remain as minimum 
standards for labours and on matters relating to la bours. 
(2) Where an employment contract is entered into between a n employer 
and a labour with provisions to pay or receive remunerati on or benefits lesser than 
the remuneration or benefits set forth in this Act and the rules frame d under this 
Act or in contravention of the conditions set forth in th is Act, such an employment 
contract shall be deemed to be contrary to this Act,  and it shall, to that extent, be 
void.  
4. Prohibition on employing in forced labour : (1) No person shall employ any 
labour in forced labour, directly or indirectly. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the 
following work or service performed by a labour shal l not be deemed to be forced 
labour:  
(a) Any work or service required to be performed under the duties of 
citizens as and when the nation so requires,  
(b) Any work or service required to be performed by any person in 
consideration for the sentence imposed by a decision  or order of a 
court,
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
5 
 
 (c) Any work or service required to be performed as a member of a 
community for the interest of such a community. 
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "forc ed labour" means any 
work or service performed by any labour against his o r her will as a result of a 
threat of taking any action having financial, physica l or mental impact if he or she 
does not perform such a work or service .  
5. Prohibition on employment of children: No person shall so employ a child in 
any work as to be contrary to law.  
6. Prohibition on discrimination: (1) No employer shall discriminate any labour on 
the ground of religion, colour, sex, caste, tribe, origin, language, ideological 
conviction or other similar ground.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the 
following act shall not be considered as discrimina tion:  
(a) To give preference to any person for employment on the basis of 
inherent requirement of a work or service,  
(b) To engage a female labour who is pregnant in any wo rk or service 
which is easier and suitable to her physical conditi on, without any 
reduction in the remuneration and benefits, or  
(c) To give preference to a labour with physical disabi lity for such job 
responsibility as is suitable to his or her physical condition.  
7. Prohibition on discrimination in remuneration for equal work: (1) No 
discrimination shall be made between the labours in  remuneration for equal value 
of work on the ground of sex.  
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), whether the wo rk is of equal 
value shall be determined on the basis of the natur e of the concerned work, the 
time required for its performance, labour, skill an d productivity. 
8. Right relating to trade union: (1) Every labour shall, subject to this Act and othe r 
laws, have a right to form and operate a trade unio n, acquire the membership of, 
or get affiliated with, such union or involve in ot her activities relating to trade 
union .  
(2) While exercising the right relating to labour purs uant to this Act and 
other laws, the labour shall be dutiful and respons ible towards the employer.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
6 
 
9. Right to remedy: In the event of infringement of any right conferred by this Act 
and other law to a labour, such a labour can get re medy pursuant to this Act or 
other law.  
Chapter- 3 
Provisions Relating to Employment  
10. Types of employment: (1) An employer may engage a labour in any type of the 
following employment: 
(a) Regular employment,  
(b) Work-based employment,  
(c) Time-based employment,  
(d) Casual employment,  
(e) Part-time employment.  
Explanation:  For the purpose of this Section, - 
(1) “Regular employment” means employment of any type whatever 
other than that set forth in clauses (b), (c) and ( d).  
(2) “Work- based employment” means employment that the employer 
provides or has provided specifying any particular wo rk or service 
for performance. 
(3) “Time -based employment” means  employment that the employer 
provides or has provided to the labour specifying a certain period on 
the condition that the labour has to provide any se rvice or perform 
any work within that period.  
(4) “Casual employment” means employment that the employer 
provides or has provided to the labour on the condi tion that the 
labour has to provide any service or perform any work , for seven 
days or less within a period of one month. 
(5) "Part-time employment" means employment that the emp loyer 
provides or has provided to the labour on the condi tion that the 
labour has to perform a work in thirty-five hours o r less than thirty-
five hours in a week.  
(2) If there arises a question as to whether any employm ent is regular 
or not, it shall be determined as prescribed on the  basis of the nature of the work , 
notwithstanding anything contained in the employment contract .
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
7 
 
11. Prohibition on employment without entering into em ployment contract : (1) 
No employer shall employ a person without entering in to an employment contract.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), it shall not 
be necessary to enter into an employment contract in writing for a casual 
employment.  
(3) While entering into an employment contract pursuant to sub-section 
(1), remuneration, benefits to be received by the la bour, conditions of employment 
and other matters as prescribed shall be set out in  such a contract.  
12. Employment relationship to be established: (1) Where the employer enters into 
an employment contract with a labour or employs a labour verbally or engages a 
worker on casual employment, the employment relation ship between the employer 
and the employee shall be established, or in the cas e of the casual employment, 
such relation is established from the date or time when the labour is employed or 
he or she provides the service. 
(2) Where there arises a dispute as to whether the emp loyment 
relationship has existed between an employer and a la bour, such a dispute shall be 
settled by the Office.  
(3) Where the dispute referred to in sub-section (2) i s also included in 
any issue that is sub judice  in the Department or a Court, such a dispute shall also 
be settled by the Department or Court.  
(4) For the purpose of sub-section (2), the Office may give an order to 
the employer to submit any evidence or document rela ting to the employment 
which remains in his or her custody, and if the empl oyer does not submit such 
evidence or document in pursuance of the order, the  employment relationship 
between the employer and the labour shall be deemed to have been established .  
13. Provision relating to probation period: In entering into  an employment contract 
with a labour, the employer may so enter into the con tract that he or she remains 
in a probation period for six months, and terminate the employment contract with 
the labour if his or her work is not satisfactory d uring the probation period . After 
the end of the probation period of a labour in resp ect of whom the employment 
contract has not been so terminated, the employment relation shall ipso facto  be 
deemed to be valid.  
14. Continuity of existence of the employment relation ship despite change in 
ownership:  (1) In the case of a change in or transfer of owne rship of any work or
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
8 
 
business or any part thereof of any employer or hand o ver of such a work or 
business to another person for its operation or cre ation of a new enterprise or 
business as a result of the merger of two or more e nterprises or businesses, the 
employment relationship of the labour working in suc h an enterprise or business 
the ownership of which has been so changed or trans ferred or which has been so 
handed over to the other person for its operation o r in the enterprise or business 
which has been merged shall continue to exist .  
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the employer w ho so undertakes 
the ownership or acquires the ownership by way of tr ansfer or undertakes 
responsibility to operate the work or business or, i n the case of a merger of 
businesses or enterprises, the new enterprise or busine ss created from such merger 
or, in the case of the transfer of the ownership an d liability of a project in 
accordance with the prevailing law relating to priv ate investment in the building 
and operation of infrastructures, the enterprise un dertaking such ownership and 
liability shall bear the liability under this Act or th e rules framed under this Act or 
the collective agreement, if any, entered into. 
Provided that if any agreement on interim management  has been made 
between the previous employer, new employer and unio n of the concerned 
enterprise, the provisions of the agreement shall apply .  
15. Continuity of existence of employment relationship  during the period held in 
reserve: (1) If any special circumstance arises in the workplace , the employer may 
suspend the work and hold the worker in reserve .  
Explanation:  For the purpose of this Section, "special circumst ance" 
means a situation involving the shortage of electri city, water, raw materials or lack 
of financial resources or inability to reach the wor kplace or work or operate the 
workplace because of the occurrence of any situation  beyond control.  
(2) Where any labour is held in reserve pursuant to sub -section (1), the 
employment relationship between such an employer and worker shall continue to 
exist .  
(3) Any employer employing ten or more labours may hold th e labour 
in reserve for a period not exceeding fifteen days, pursuant to sub-section (1). 
Provided that if it is necessary to hold in reserve for mo re than the said period, the 
employer shall consult with the authorised trade uni on or labour relation 
committee.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
9 
 
(4) Other provisions relating to holding the labour in re serve shall be as 
prescribed.  
 
Chapter-4 
Provisions Relating to Trainees and Apprentices 
16. Trainees may be engaged in work: (1) Any enterprise may, by making an 
agreement with any educational institu te, employ any person as an apprentice in 
accordance with the approved curriculum of such an institute. 
(2) The apprentice referred to in sub-section (1) shal l not be deemed to 
be a labour for the purpose of this Act.  
Provided that if the person is employed contrary to t he approved 
curriculum, he or she shall be deemed to be a labou r in the regular employment.  
17. Provisions relating to labour to be applicable: (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in Section 16, in employing an apprentice pursuant to this Chapter, he 
or she shall not be engaged in work for more than e ight hours a day and forty-eight 
hours a week.  
(2) The provisions relating to occupational health and  safety shall apply 
to the apprentice s as if they were labours .  
(3) Where an apprentice meets with an accident in the course of 
performing the work of the enterprise, the enterpri se shall, unless otherwise agreed 
between the enterprise and the educational institut e, have medical treatment of 
such an apprentice, and provide compensation to him  or her if he or she suffers 
grievous hurt, as if he or she were a labour.  
(4) The matters other than those set forth in sub-sect ions (1), (2) and (3) 
shall be as mentioned in the agreement between the ente rprise and the educational 
institut e. 
18. Engagement in work as trainee labour: ( 1) An employer may employ any person 
as a trainee providing on the job training.  
(2) The period of training referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be more 
than one year.  
Provided that a ny period is specified by the prevailing law for a spe cific 
work or specific training period is required for it , a trainee may accordingly be 
employed for that period.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
10 
 
(3) The employer shall provide the person employed a tr ainee pursuant 
to this Section with at least such facilities as ma y not be less than the minimum 
remuneration and other social security benefits incl uding the sick leave, gratuity, 
provident fund and insurance. 
(4) The employer shall not be compelled to continue the employment of 
the trainee after the completion of the training pe riod.  
Provided that if the same employer engages the train ee in work, the 
probation period shall not apply to him or her.  
 
Chapter-5 
Provisions Relating to Part-Time Labours  
19.  Part-time employment : (1) An employer may employ a labour for part time.  
Provided that a worker who works full time shall no t be employed in part-
time work without his or her consent .  
(2) The remuneration of part time labours shall be fix ed generally on 
the basis of working time (hours) or on the basis o f the employment contract 
entered into between the two parties.  
(3) While fixing the remuneration of the part time lab ours pursuant to 
sub-section (2), such remuneration shall be fixed o n the basis of at least the 
monthly remuneration of the labours working full tim e at the same level for the 
work of same nature.  
(4) Where a labour employed part-time pursuant to this  Section is 
employed in the overtime work, such a labour shall b e provided with a 
remuneration that is 1.5 times of the remuneration to which he or she is entitled 
under sub-section (2).  
20. Not to restrain from working elsewhere: No part time labour shall be restrained 
from working elsewhere.  
21. Provisions relating to social security: In the case of a part-time labour who works 
for more than one employer, each employer shall, on t he basis of the basic 
remuneration to which the labour is entitled, make contribution for gratuity, 
provident fund or other social security related benefits.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
11 
 
Chapter-6 
Provisio ns Relating to Work Permit 
22. Restriction on employment of foreigners: (1) No employer shall employ any 
foreign citizen as a labour without obtaining the w ork permit from the Department.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the 
employer may, if the skilled labour that it needs can not be supplied from among 
Nepali citizens, employ a foreign labour subject to this Section .  
(3) Prior to employing a foreign labour pursuant to sub-section (2), the 
employer shall publish an advertisement in a nationa l daily newspaper in order to 
acquire the required skilled labour from among the Nepali citizens. If, in spite of 
such an advertisement, no application is received f rom any Nepali citizen as 
prescribed or any Nepali citizen cannot be selected,  the employer may make an 
application, accompanied by the evidence thereof, to  the Department for the work 
permit for employing a foreign labour .  
(4) The Department may, if it deems reasonable upon inqui ring into the 
application received under sub-section (3) and the evidence attached therewith, 
issue a work permit for the employment of a foreign skilled labour.  
(5) Any employer who employs a foreign labour by obtaini ng the work 
permit pursuant to sub-section (4) shall make arran gement for making Nepali 
citizens skilled and gradual replacement of foreign  labours .  
(6) The fees and other provisions relating to the work permit  shall be as 
prescribed.  
23. Foreign citizen to obtain work permit to work in N epal: (1) A foreign labour 
shall obtain the work permit as prescribed in order  to work in Nepal.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in th is Act, any 
foreign citizen who work in Nepal shall, except whe re he or she is entitled to 
diplomatic immunity or is not required to obtain a w ork permit under any treaty 
or agreement concluded with the Government of Nepal , obtain a work permit as 
prescribed.  
24. Work permit may be issued: Notwithstanding anything contained in Sections 22 
and 23 , the Department may, upon maintaining the records, is sue the work permit 
to foreign nationals in the following circumstance :
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
12 
 
(a) The chief executive of an enterprise with foreign investment or 
operated with foreign assistance and such number of  labours as 
prescribed to work in that enterprise, 
 (b) Any technician who comes to repair or maintain any machinery 
object or install any new technology or to do similar  other unforeseen work for a 
period of three months or less than three months. 
25. Language of the contract: While entering into the employment contract with a 
foreign labour and providing information relating t o the work to be performed by 
him or her, conditions of his or her service and be nefits, the employer shall enter 
into, or cause to be entered into, such a contract or provide such information in 
such a language that he or she understands or in th e English language. 
26. Remuneration may be repatriated in convertible for eign currency : Any 
foreign labour who has obtained the work permit pur suant to this Chapter shall be 
allowed to repatriate to his or her country the amou nt of remuneration earned by 
working in Nepal in a convertible foreign currency.  
27. Remuneration, conditions of service, benefits of a nd other provisions relating 
to foreign labours: (1) The remuneration to which a foreign labour is e ntitled for 
the work performed, conditions of service and benef its of him or her shall be so 
mentioned in the time-based or task-based employment  contract entered into 
between the employer and the labour as not being less favourable than the 
standards set by this Act or the rules framed under this Act.  
(2) The employment contract shall remain valid for such  a period as 
mentioned in th at contract, and failing such a provision, for a peri od not exceeding 
three years.  
(3) Other provisions relating to foreign labours shall  be as prescribed.  
 
Chapter-7 
Provisions Relating to Working Hours 
28. Working hours: (1) No employer shall employ labours to work more th an eight 
hours a day and forty-eight hours a week.  
(2) The labours shall be provided with half an hour re st after five 
hours of continuous work.  
(3) In the cases of work which is not to be stopped an d is to be carried 
out continuously, labours shall be provided with suc h a rest time turn by turn.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
13 
 
(4) The rest time to be provided pursuant to sub-secti ons (2) and (3) 
shall be counted in the working hours referred to i n sub-section (1).  
29. Not to comp el to work overtime: (1) No employer shall compel a labour to work 
more than the hours set forth in sub-section (1) of  Section 28. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), if the non-
performance of a work is likely to cause an adverse effect on the life, safety and 
health of any person or a serious loss or damage to the employer, the concerned 
labour may, subject to sub-section (1) of Section 30 , be caused to work overtime. 
30. Provisions relating to overtime: (1) Where an employer needs to cause any 
labour to work for more than the working hours spec ified subject to Section 28, 
such a labour may be caused to work not exceeding fo ur hours a day and twenty-
four hours a week.  
(2) The work which any labour has been caused by the emp loyer to 
perform without giving the substitute leave pursuan t to Section 42 shall be deemed 
to be an overtime work.  
31. Additional remuneration to be paid: (1) While employing any labour to work 
overtime pursuant to Section 30, the employer shall pay to the labour remuneration 
at a rate of 1.5 times of the basic remuneration re ceivable during regular hours of 
work.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), nothing 
contained in this Section shall bar the collective agreement to provide for certain 
benefits or the providing of such benefits as mentioned in the  employment contract 
in the case of the labour of managerial level, in lie u of the additional remuneration 
receivable for an overtime work.  
32. Fixation of working hours: (1) Where an employment contract specifies the 
starting and finishing time of working hours for wo rkers, it shall be followed 
accordingly or in its absence, it shall be as determ ined by the employer.  
(2) Other provisions relating to working hours shall b e as prescribed.  
33. Arrangement for transportation to be made: In employing a female labour 
where the working hours begin after the sunset or b efore the sun rise, the employer 
shall make necessary arrangement for transportation  to and from the workplace.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
14 
 
Chapter-8 
Provisions Relating to Remuneration 
34. Entitlement of labours to remuneration: (1) Each worker shall be entitled to 
receive the remuneration and benefits from the date  on which he or she starts the 
work.  
(2) The remuneration and benefits which a labour is entitled to shall be 
so specified in the employment contract as not to be less t han that specified in th is 
Act and the rules framed under this Act.  
(3) Except as mentioned in the collective agreement between the 
employer and the labour, the remuneration and benefi ts being received and 
enjoyed by the labour shall not be decreased.  
35. Payment of remuneration:  (1) In paying the remuneration to the labour, the 
employer shall make such payment in accordance with t he provision, if any, 
mentioned in the employment contract to that effect , and failing such a provision, 
at such a time as determined by the employer. 
  Provided that the remuneration shall be paid as fol lows to the following 
labour: 
(a) In the case of a labour working for a period of  less than one month, 
within three days from the date of completion of the  work.  
(b) In the case of a labour employed in a casual work, immediately after 
the completion of the work.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the interval 
between the dates for payment of remuneration shall not be more than one month.  
36. Entitlement to annual increment in remuneration (g rade): Any labour who has 
completed one year of service period shall be entitl ed to an annual increment in 
remuneration (grade) each year in an amount equal to  at least half a day 
remuneration based on the monthly basic remuneration  to which the labour is 
entitled .  
37. Entitlement to festival expense: (1) Each labour shall be entitled to an amount 
equal to the basic remuneration of one month as the festival expense each year for 
the festival to be celebrated according to his or h er religion, culture and tradition.  
(2) A labour may make a written request to the employer fo r the 
payment of the festival expense referred to in sub-s ection (1) at one time in one 
fiscal year on the occasion of the main festival to be celebrated according to his
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
15 
 
or her religion, culture and tradition. In the case a bsent such a request, the festival 
expense shall be provided at the time of Dashain fe stival every year.  
(3) A labour who has not completed one year of service period on or 
before the day of payment of the festival expense shall be entitled to such expense 
in proportion to the period of service he or she ha s completed .  
38. Prohibition on deduction of remuneration: (1) Except in the following 
circumstance, no amount shall be deducted from the remuneration receivable by 
the labour: 
(a) Any tax, fees leviable under law, 
(b) Any amount of contribution required to be made f or provident fund 
or insurance or any other social security,  
(c) Any amount required to be deducted pursuant to the order or 
decision by any judicial or quasi-judicial body or ar bitration,  
(d) Such amount as prescribed for such service or faci lity provided by 
the employer to the labour as prescribed, 
(e) Amount of remuneration for the period during wh ich the labour 
remains absent from the work, 
(f) In the event of loss of or damage to cash or in-ki nd of the employer 
with ulterior motive or recklessly, such amount as m entioned in the 
cash or in-kind book or the amount equivalent to th e production cost 
in the case of a manufactured good,  
(g) Such amount as specified in the collective agreeme nt to be 
deductible from remuneration, 
(h) Membership fee chargeable by the trade union,  
(i) Amount of loan or advance provided or paid to the labour by the 
employer.  
(2) While deducting the amount pursuant to sub-section  (c), (d), (e), (f), 
(g), (h) or (i), it shall be deducted from the mont hly remuneration that remains 
after deducting the amounts set forth in sub-sectio ns (a) and (b).  
(3) The limit of, procedure and other provisions relat ing to the amount 
deductible under sub-section (2) shall be as prescr ibed.  
(4) Where a labour dies or is relieved of service for any reason 
whatsoever before the amount deductible pursuant to  this Section is deducted, such 
an amount may be deducted from any amount whatsoever payable to such a labour.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
16 
 
(5) Where the amount to be deducted cannot be recov ered even after 
making deductions pursuant to sub-section (4) and t he labour has died, the 
employer shall give a notice of fifteen days to his or her heir under the law for the 
payment of such an amount. 
(6)  Where the amount is not paid even within the p eriod referred to in 
sub-section (5), the employer may make a petition to  the court for the recovery of 
such an amount within thirty-five days of the expiry of the period .  
39. Remuneration for reserve period:  Where a labour is held in reserve pursuant to 
this Act, the employer shall pay half the remuneratio n which he or she is entitled 
to until the work is resumed. 
Provided that such a labour shall not be required t o make attendance in the 
workplace during the reserve period unless the requ irement of attendance is 
mentioned in the notice on holding the labour in re serve. 
 
Chapter- 9 
Provisions Relating to Leave 
40. Weekly leave : A labour shall get the weekly leave of one day in ea ch month .  
41. Public leave: (1) Each labour shall each year get a paid public le ave of thirteen 
days including the May Day, and fourteen days includ ing International Women 
Labour Day in the case of a female labour .  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the public 
holidays in the case of an enterprise shall be as de termined by the regulatory 
authority, if any, that regulates such an enterprise  and as determined by the 
employer in the other situations.  
42. Substitute leave : (1) A labour who is involved in a work that must not be s topped 
or must be done continuously shall get the substitut e leave in consideration for 
having work ed on any day of weekly or public leave.  
(2) Any labour who has been engaged in work o n a day of weekly or 
public leave shall be provided with the substitute leave within twenty-one days of 
the date of engagement in work.  
43. Home leave: (1) Every labour shall get paid home leave at the ra te of one day for 
twenty days of the period he or she has work ed.  
(2) A labour who is employed in an educational institu tion or who gets 
summer or winter leave shall not get home leave.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
17 
 
Provided that where such leave is lesser than the p eriod of home leave, the 
labour shall get home leave for such number of days as is so lesser. 
44. Sick leave: (1) A labour shall get paid sick leave of twelve da ys a year. 
Provided that a labour who work for a period of one year  or lesser than one 
year shall get the sick leave proportionately. 
(2) A labour who seeks the sick leave for more than  three consecutive 
days shall submit a certificate on his or her medica l check-up by a recognized 
doctor .  
(3) Where a labour has to take leave because of sudden  illness, the 
labour shall inform the employer or the person speci fied by the employer through 
the fastest means to the extent available .  
45. Maternity leave: (1) A pregnant female labour shall get a maternity leave of a 
total of fourteen weeks before or after delivery. 
(2) A pregnant labour shall compulsorily take leave fro m at least two 
weeks before the expected date of delivery to at lea st six weeks after the date of 
delivery. 
(3) A female labour who takes the maternity leave refer red to in sub-
section (1) shall get full remuneration for sixty da ys and shall not get remuneration 
for the remaining period. 
(4) Where a recognized medical doctor recommends that the female 
labour who has delivered a baby needs further rest f or her or her baby’s health , the 
employer shall approve unpaid leave of up to one mon th in addition to the period 
referred to in sub-section (1) or sanction such lea ve to be adjusted with other leave, 
in continuity with the maternity leave. 
(5) Where a female labour in a state of seven months ’ pregnancy or 
more than seven months gives birth to a deceased child or su ffers miscarriage, she 
shall get leave as if she made normal delivery .  
(6) Where the mother dies before the completion of six ty days of the 
birth of her child, the labour whose wife has so di ed may take paid leave for the 
remaining period for the care of the child from the  employer for whom he is 
working.  
(7) If a male labour’s wife is going to deliver a baby, he shall get paid 
maternity care leave for a period of fifteen days.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
18 
 
46. Birth registration certificate to be submitted: Except where a newly born child 
dies, a female worker who is on maternity leave shall submit  a copy of such birth 
registration certificate as prescribed to the emplo yer.  
47. Remuneration need not be paid: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere 
in this Chapter, where a provision is made that a female labour is to receiv e 
remuneration for the period of maternity leave from the Social Security Fund, the 
employer shall not be required to pay, to that exten t, the remuneration referred to 
in this Chapter to the labour for such a period of leave.  
48. Mourning leave: (1) Where a labour himself or herself has to mourn accord ing to 
his or her religion or because her husband or his w ife dies or a married female 
worker has to mourn on the death of her father or m other or father- in-law or 
mother- in-law, such a labour shall get a mourning leave of t hirteen days .  
(2) The labour who goes on the mourning leave referred to in sub-
section (1) shall get full remuneration.  
49. Accumulation of leave: (1) A labour is entitled to accumulate the home leave and 
the sick leave for up to ninety days and forty-five d ays, respectively.  
(2) Where a labour is relieved of the service for any r eason or dies, he 
or she or such family member of him or her as prescr ibed shall get the lump sum 
amount to be set by the last basic remuneration bein g drawn by him or her for his 
or her accumulated home leave and sick leave. 
(3) A labour whose accumulated leave exceeds the perio d specified in 
sub-section (1) shall, at the end of each year, get the a mount to be set by his or her 
basic remuneration for the leave of such excess per iod.  
50. Computation of year: A year shall, for the purpose of leave, be computed on the 
following basis :  
(a) Where it is determined by law, it shall be in accordance wit h such 
law,  
(b) Where it is determined by the regulatory body, it shall be in  
accordance with such provision, 
(c)  Where it is not determined pursuant to clause (a) or (b), it shall be 
as set out in the employment contract, 
(d)  Where it is not determined as set forth in cla uses (a), (b) and (c), it 
shall be in accordance with the financial year of the Government of 
Nepal.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
19 
 
51. Leave not as a matter of right: (1) All leaves except the sick leave, mourning 
leave and maternity leave which the labour is entitl ed to pursuant to this Chapter 
are only facility and cannot be claimed as a matter of right.  
(2) In the case of leaves other than th at mentioned in sub-section (1), 
the employer may, for the reason to be specified, re fuse, withhold, deduct or alter 
the time of the approved leave , on the basis of the need of the work at the 
workplace.  
 
Chapter- 10 
Provisions Relating to Provident Fund, Gratuity and  Insurance  
52. Contribution for provident fund : (1) The employer shall deduct ten percent of 
the basic remuneration of each labour, add cent perce nt to that amount and deposit 
the total amount for the purpose of provident fund.   
(2) The employer shall deposit the amount referred to i n sub-section (1) 
in the Social Security Fund in the name of the conce rned labour, with effect from 
the date on which he or she started to work .  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the sub-secti on (2), the 
employer shall, in the followi ng circumstance, deposit such provident fund amount 
as prescribed:  
(a) Until the Social Security Fund is established and c omes into 
operation, or 
(b)  Until the law relating to the Social Security F und becomes 
applicable to the concerned employer.  
(4) In the case of a labour for whom the amount for provi dent fund was 
not contributed before the commencement of this Act , the employer shall 
contribute the amount for provident fund from the d ate of the commencement of 
this Act.  
(5) The amount for the provident fund deposited in the  retirement fund 
or any other similar fund established under the laws  in force at the time of the 
commencement of this Act or held in the custody of t he employer shall be 
transferred to the Social Security Fund as prescribe d after the commencement of 
this Act.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in th is Section, the 
employer shall make payment of an additional amount equ ivalent to ten percent of
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
20 
 
the basic remuneration of such a labour if the amount for the provident fund cannot 
be deposited pursuant to Section (2) or (3) for any reason.  
53. To receive gratuity: (1) The employer shall deduct an amount equivalent to eight 
point three and three (8.33) percent of the basic r emuneration of each labour each 
month and deposit it for the purpose of gratuity.  
(2) The amount referred to in sub-section (1) shall be  deposited in the 
Social Security Fund in the name of the concerned la bour with effect from the date 
on which such a labour begins to work .  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2), the 
employer shall, in the following circumstance, depos it such amount of gratuity as 
prescribed:  
(a) Until the Social Security Fund is established and c omes into 
operation, or  
(b) Until the law relating to the Social Security Fund is applicable to 
the concerned employer.  
(4) The employer shall provide the gratuity referred to  in sub-section 
(1) from the date of the commencement of this Act i n the case of a labour whom 
the gratuity is not required to be paid to before th e commencement of this Act. 
(5) The amount for gratuity deposited in the retire ment fund or any 
other similar fund established under the laws in fo rce at the time of the 
commencement of this Act or held in the custody of the employer shall be 
transferred to the Social Security Fund as prescribe d after the commencement of 
this Act.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in th is Section, the 
employer shall pay to a labour an additional amount e quivalent to eight point three 
and three (8.33) percent of the basic remuneration of such a labour if the amount 
for gratuity cannot be deposited for any reason pursu ant to sub-section (2) or (3). 
(7)  Any labour who is entitled to pension shall not  get the gratuity 
referred to in this Act .  
54. Medical insurance to be made: (1) The employer shall procure make an annual 
medical insurance of at least one hundred thousand rupees for e ach labour .  
(2) The premium required for the medical insurance ref erred to in sub-
section (1) shall be borne by both the employer and t he labour on pro rata basis.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
21 
 
55. Accidental insurance to be made: (1) The employer shall procure accidental 
insurance of at least seven hundred thousand rupees  covering all kinds of accidents 
for e ach labour .  
(2) The whole premium required for the accidental insu rance referred 
to in sub-section (1) shall be borne by the employer.   
(3) If a labour dies or gets completely incapacitated m entally or 
physically as a result of an accident, such a labour or his or her legal heir under 
the prevailing law shall get for compensation the c ent percent of the amount of 
insurance referred to in sub-section (1). 
(4)  If a labour gets injured or incapacitated in an accident , he or she 
shall get compensation on the basis of the percenta ge of incapacitation as 
prescribed. 
56. Amount to be paid by the employer: Where a labour or his or her dependent heir 
is not able to obtain the amount of insurance becau se of the failure of the employer 
to procure insurance referred to in this Chapter or a ny recklessness or error made 
in the making of insurance, the employer shall pay an  amount equivalent to the 
insurance to such a labour or dependent heir. \ 
57. Social security scheme to be applicable: Any employer or labour who so makes 
contribution in the social security scheme as to be entitled to the benefits including 
the provident fund, gratuity and medical insurance p ursuant to the law relating to 
the Social Security Fund shall not be required to ma ke additional contribution or 
insurance under this Chapter, to the extent of such  contribution.  
 
Chapter- 11 
Provisions Relating to Supply of Labours  
58. Labours may be employed through supplier: (1) The Ministry shall, o n 
recommendation of the Council, publish a list of wo rks in which labours may be 
employed through labour suppliers, by publishing a no tification in the Nepal 
Gazette. 
(2) While employing a labour through a labour supplier pursuant to sub-
section (1), the employer shall employ him or her in  any work other than the core 
work of the business or service.  
(3) While inviting or submitting any kind of proposal o r tender for the 
purpose of supplying or causing to supply a labour through a labour supplier or
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
22 
 
entering into an agreement for the supply of labour,  such proposal or tender or 
agreement shall be invited or submitted or entered into so that the remuneration 
and other benefits of the labour to be supplied sha ll not be less than th at specified 
in this Act.  
(4) Any proposal or tender invited or submitted or agre ement entered 
into contrary to sub-section (3) shall ipso facto  be invalid.  
Explanation:  For the purpose of this Section, "core work" means the  work 
mentioned while establishing the business and work directly related thereto.  
59. License to be obtained: (1) A company that wishes to supply labours shall obt ain 
a license pursuant to this Act.  
Explanation:  For the purpose of this Chapter, "company" means an y 
company incorporated in accordance with law.  
(2) A company that wishes to obtain a license shall make a n application 
in the prescribed format, accompanied by such fees, details and documents as 
prescribed, to the Office of the concerned area.  
Provided that a company that wishes to supply labour s in an area with more 
than one Offices shall make an application in the p rescribed format, accompanied 
by such fees, details and documents as prescribed, t o the Department in order to 
obtain the license.  
(3) If the content of an application received pursuant  to sub-section (2) 
seems to be reasonable upon its examination, the De partment or Office shall, by 
taking such a deposit or bank guarantee as prescrib ed, issue the license to such an 
applicant on such conditions and in such a format a s prescribed not later than 
fifteen days.  
(4) While issuing a license pursuant to sub-section (3 ), the work or 
service and scope of work relating to the supply of labours shall be mentioned in 
such a license.  
Provided that the same company shall not be allowed to supply labours for 
more than two works or services .  
(5) Any organization or person carrying out labour suppl y related 
business at the time of commencement of this Act sh all, not later than six months 
from the date of commencement of this Act, incorpor ate a company carrying out 
the business of supplying labours in accordance with  the prevailing company law 
and obtain the license pursuant to this Section.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
23 
 
60. Submission of details by licensee: A licensee who has obtained a license from 
the Office shall submit to the Office, and a licens ee who has obtained a license 
from the Department shall submit to the Department,  such details as prescribed 
before the last day of the month of Poush (mid Janu ary) e ach year.   
61. Obligations of labour supplier: (1) The labour supplier shall not perform acts 
and actions contrary to the conditions or directions  as prescribed under this Act or 
the rules framed under this Act.   
(2) The labour supplier shall, in the capacity of the e mployer referred 
to in this Act, provide such remuneration and other  benefits regularly to the labour 
it supplies as may not be less than th at determined under this Act.  
(3) The labour supplier shall regularly obtain informatio n as to whether 
or not the main employer has taken or made such mea sures and provisions or 
arrangements as required to be taken or made in the  workplace for occupational 
safety and health of the labour, and recommend for m aking such arrangements 
immediately i f it is found that such arrangements have not been ma de.  
(4) Where it is found that the main employer has not im plement ed the 
recommendation referred to in sub-section (3), the labour supplier shall give 
information thereof to the Department or concerned Office. 
62. Revocation, suspension of license or fine: ( 1) The Department or Office issuing 
the license may revoke the licence of a labour supplier in the following 
circumstance :  
(a) I f the labour supplier makes an application in writing  for the 
revocation of his or her license, or  
(b) If, in spite of the fine imposed pursuant to sub-s ection (6), the labour 
supplier continues to violate the conditions specif ied or directions 
issued pursuant to this Act or the rules framed und er this Act.  
(2) Prior to the revocation of a license pursuant to c lause (b) of sub-
section (1), the concerned labour supplier shall be  provided with an opportunity 
of at least seven days to furnish his or her explana tion. 
(3) A notice on the decision made to revoke the licens e pursuant to this 
Section shall be published public ly.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in thi s Section , if it 
appears that the labour supplier whose license has been revoked has any financial 
liability towards the Government of Nepal or any labo ur, he or she shall not get
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
24 
 
immunity from the performance of such liability by t he reason of the revocation 
of the license.  
(5) The Department or Office may suspend as prescribed the license of 
any labour supplier if such a labour supplier fails to comply with the terms 
specified in and directions given under this Act an d the rules framed under this 
Act.  
(6) If any labour supplier fails to comply with the t erms specified in and 
directions given under this Act and the rules frame d under this Act, the Department 
or Office may impose on such a labour supplier a fin e not exceeding twenty-five 
thousand rupees for the first time. 
63. Payment of remuneration and other benefits : (1) In the event of revocation of 
the license of a labour supplier , such a labour supplier shall pay such amount of 
remuneration and other benefits as is payable to a labour within fifteen days.  
(2) In the event of failure to pay the amount of remune ration and other 
benefits receivable by a labour within the period sp ecified in sub-section (1), the 
Department or Office that has issued the license shall  arrange the payment of such 
amount from the deposit or bank guarantee furnished  or given by such a labour 
supplier  to such a labour at the time of obtaining  the license.  
(3) Where the amount of deposit or bank guarantee is n ot sufficient to 
pay the remuneration and other benefits pursuant to sub-section (2), the payment 
shall be made on pro rata basis. If such a labour supplier body is liquidated or 
dissolved, payment of the remaining remuneration and other benefits shal l be made 
in accordance with the prevailing law. If such a body i s continuing other activities 
without being dissolved or liquidated, the Office s hall give an order for the 
payment of such remuneration and benefits from its o ther properties.  
64. Obligations of the main employer: (1) The main employer shall , while 
employing a labour through a licensee labour supplier , so employ him or her in 
accordance with the agreement entered with such a labour supplier .  
(2) The main employer shall, before entering into the a greement, 
arrange for the provision of such remuneration and benefits as may not be less 
than that specified in this Act or the rules framed under th is Act to the labour .  
(3) The main employer shall regularly obtain information as to whether 
or not the labour supplier has provided the remuner ation and benefits regularly to 
the labour employed through such a labour supplier.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
25 
 
(4) If, while obtaining information pursuant to sub -section (3), it is 
found that the labour supplier has not provided the  remuneration and benefits to 
the labour, the main employer shall immediately recom mend the labour supplier 
to provide such remuneration and benefits and give information thereof to the 
Department or Office as well. 
(5) If the labour supplier fails to provide the rem uneration and benefits 
to the labour in spite of the request made pursuant  to sub-section (4), the main 
employer shall give information thereof to the Depar tment or Office.  
(6) If information is received pursuant to sub-section (5 ) or information 
is received through any other means about the labour supplier’s failure to provide 
the remuneration and benefits to a labour, the Depa rtment or Office may make 
payment from the deposit or bank guarantee furnished  by such a labour supplier 
at the time of obtaining the license.  
(7) The main employer shall take or make such measures and provisions 
or arrangements as required to be taken or made at the  workplace for occupational 
safety and health. 
(8) If the remuneration or benefits to be provided to the labour pursuant 
to the prevailing law increase after the agreement betw een the labour supplier and 
the main employer has been made, the main employer sh all add and pay such 
increased remuneration or benefits. 
(9) No labour shall be supplied from any enterprise est ablished with the 
involvement of the main employer or of any manager o r director or family 
member, on his or her behalf.  
(10) Other provisions relating to the obligations of th e main employe r 
shall be as prescribed.  
65. To make inspection, supervision and monitoring: (1) The Office shall regularly 
make inspection and monitoring as to whether or not t he labour supplier has acted 
in accordance with this Act or the rules framed und er this Act and the directions 
and conditions given and prescribed pursuant to thi s Act and the rules framed 
under this Act.  
(2) If it is found from an on-site inspection , monitoring or any other 
means that a ny labour supplier has not acted pursuant to th is Act and the rules 
framed under this Act or the conditions specified a s applicable to him or her, the 
Office may give necessary direction to the labour sup plier .
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
26 
 
(3) It shall be the duty of the concerned labour suppli er to comply with 
the direction given pursuant to sub-section (2). 
66. Liability of labour s to rest on the main employer:  Where any main employer 
employs any labour by supplying such a labour through a  person or company who 
has not obtained the license to supply labours pursu ant to this Act or contrary to 
the provisions of this Act, such a labour shall be deemed to be a labour of the main 
employer.  
67. Prohibition on collecting fee from labour: No labour supplier shall collect any 
kind of fee or commission from any labour whom it h as supplie d. 
 
Chapter- 12 
Provisions Relating to Occupation Safety and Health  
68. Formulation of safety and health Policy: (1) Subject to the provisions of this 
Act, the rules framed under th is Act and directions given pursuant to th is Act and 
the rules framed under this Ac t, the employer shall formulate and implement a 
policy on safety and health of the labours and other persons at the workplace.  
(2) The policy formulated pursuant to sub-section (1) s hall be registered 
with the Office.  
(3) Other provisions relating to the safety and health policy to be 
formulated by the employer shall be as prescribed.  
(4) The Office shall regularly monitor as to whether or  not the safety 
and health policy formulated by the employer under th is Section has been 
complied with.  
69. Duties of employer towards labour: (1) The duties of the employer towards the 
labour in respect of occupational safety and health shall be as follows: 
(a) To make safe environment for work by making appropr iate 
safety and health arrangements at the workplace, 
(b) To make provision for the use, operation, storing and  
transportation of chemical, physical or biological m aterials 
or equipment so that it would not adversely affect t he safety 
and health, 
(c) To provide necessary information, notice and train ing 
relating to the safety and health to the labour, as required,
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
27 
 
(d) To provide necessary training and information in a n 
appropriate language to the labour in relation to t he use and 
operation of the equipment or chemical, physical or 
biological materials related to the work, 
(e)  To make proper arrangement for the safe entry a nd exit from 
the workplace, 
(f)  To provide personal safety means to the labour, as  required, 
and  
(g) To make such other provisions as prescribed.  
(2) The employer shall not collect any fee or charge fro m a labour in 
consideration for the provision of any safety related  facility or equipment to the 
labour .  
70. Duties of employer towards non-labour: (1) The employer shall make such 
provision as may be necessary to avoid any adverse effect on the  safety and health 
of any non-labour who walks in and out of, or passes  through, the workplace.  
(2) Where any operating system of the workplace is like ly to cause any 
harmful effect or risk on  t he safety or health of any person, the employer shall 
make arrangement for giving, putting a signal or pr oviding information in that 
respect. 
(3) Any enterprise that uses or manufactur es chemical materials shall 
so manage that the chemical substance, gas or any ot her thing emitting during the 
operation of its business does not cause any adverse  effect on the local animals, 
vegetation,  human beings and environment. 
71. Duties of the responsible person: (1) It shall be the duty of the responsible person 
to ensure whether any workplace, equipment, product  or material is safe and 
healthy for the concerned work.  
Explanation:  For the purpose of this Section , "responsible person" means 
any person who has the ownership or control over the workplace, equi pment, 
product or material, and this term also includes an y person or organization 
assigned with the ownership or control in accordanc e with the agreement, if any, 
made in relation to the chief of such a workplace, use of the equipment, product 
or material.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
28 
 
72. Duties of manufacturers, importers and suppliers:  (1) The duties of the 
manufacturer, importer or supplier of any equipment, product or material to b e 
used at the workplace shall be as follows :  
(a) To manufacture, import and supply equipment, produc t or material 
found suitable from the examination for the operation a nd use at the 
workplace from the viewpoint of safety and health;  
(b) To determine such a method or process for using or  operating such 
equipment, product or material properly so that the safety and health 
of the concerned persons at the workplace is not affe cted adversely, 
(c)  To identify possible risks of causing adverse e ffect on the safety 
and health by the use of such equipment, product or material, 
(d) To conduct necessary research, use or experiment to  eliminate or 
minimize the risks identified pursuant to clause (c ), 
Provided that where there is a reasonable ground to believe 
in the results of any research, use or experiment co nducted earlier 
by any other person such a research, use or experiment may be given 
recognition.  
(e)  To prepare a manual in order to provide all the inf ormation relating 
to the necessary measures required to be taken, fro m the viewpoint 
of safety and health, during the operation and use o f the equipment, 
product or material to be operated or used at the w orkplace .  
(2) A person or organization that manufactures or installs any 
equipment to be used in the workplace shall give th e employer a report in writing 
to the effect that such equipment so manufactured o r installed, if used properly, 
will not cause any adverse effect on the safety or health of any person .  
(3) If any equipment, product or material is not used i n accordance with 
the information or instruction provided by the manuf acturer or supplier providing 
such equipment, product or material in relation to the use of the equipment, 
product or material, such equipment or material sha ll, for the purpose of this 
Section, not be deemed to have been used properly.  
(4) The manufacturer, importer or supplier of any chemi cal material to 
be used in the workplace shall provide the employer with such other details 
including the chemical safety data sheet in relation  such material as prescribed .
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
29 
 
73. Duties of labour: (1) The duties of the labour in relation to occupat ional safety 
and health shall be as follows:  
(a) Not to perform any such act in the workplace intent ionally or 
recklessly that may cause adverse effect or risk on the  safety 
and health of him or her or of others, 
(b)  To provide necessary assistance to the employer  and 
concerned person in the fulfilment of any duties mentioned 
in this Chapter,  
(c) To obtain information about the manuals, instructi ons and 
other matters prepared for the operation and use of  the 
equipment, product or material to be operated and u sed in the 
workplace safely and cautiously,  
(d) To operate and use the workplace, equipment, product or 
material safely and cautiously in accordance with the  
manuals , information and instructions prepared for the 
operation and use of such a workplace, equipment, product 
or material, and  
(e) To use compulsorily the personal safety equipment prov ided 
by the employer.  
74. To form safety and health committee: (1) The employer shall form such a safety 
and health committee with representati on of the labours also as prescribed in an 
enterprise where twenty or more labours are employed .  
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the labour s employed through a 
labour supplier shall also be counted .  
(3) The functions, duties and powers of the safety and health committee 
formed pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be as foll ows:  
(a) To give advice to the employer regularly on the arran gement 
on safety and health required to be made in the work place 
and on making such an arrangement effective, 
(b) To evaluate the arrangement on safety and health ma de in the 
workplace, and draw the attention of the employer fo r 
making such an arrangement more effective,
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
30 
 
(c) In the event of failure to do the act in spite of the attention 
drawn pursuant to clause (b), to give information t hereof to 
the Office, 
(d) To review each year the safety and health policy for mulated 
pursuant to Section 68, 
(e) To perform such other functions as prescribed. 
75. Saving from action: No employer shall take disciplinary action against an y labour 
for the sole reason that he or she has committed th e following act: 
(a) To give information, notice or make or assist i n the making of a 
complaint against the employer as to failure to make  arrangements 
on safety and health, 
(b) To do any act in the capacity of a member of the safety and health 
committee referred to in Section 74, or 
(c) To stop the work pursuant to Section 76 or 77 b ecause of occurrence 
of an immediate danger to safety and health.  
76. To stop work in the case of immediate danger: (1) Where it is likely to cause 
bodily injury or risk to, or serious effect on the he alth of, a labour or other person 
or cause unexpected loss or damage to any equipment , product or material if any 
work is not stopped immediately, the labour involved  in such a work shall give 
information thereof to the employer or responsible p erson referred to in Section 
71.  
(2) The employer or responsible person shall, upon rece ipt of the 
information referred to in sub-section (1), immedia tely give appropriate direction 
in that respect.  
(3) Where the employer or responsible person is not ava ilable for the 
time being for the purpose of giving information referred to in sub-section (1), the 
labour himself or herself may stop such a work.  
(4) Where the work is stopped pursuant to sub-section (3), the labour 
who so stops the work shall immediately give informati on thereof to the employer 
or responsible person through the fastest means. 
(5) The employer or responsible person shall, upon rece ipt of the 
information referred to in sub-section (4), immediately  inquire into the matter and 
prevent or mitigate the risks resulted therefrom .
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
31 
 
(6) Where there arises any dispute between the labour a nd the employer 
as to whether or not there has arisen any risk nece ssitating the stoppage of the 
work and the provision made for the prevention or m itigation of the risk is 
adequate, any party may make an application to the Of fice for the settlement of 
such a dispute .  
(7) On receipt of the application pursuant to sub-sect ion (6), the Office 
shall settle such a dispute upon examining the matter and  hearing both the parties , 
and also examining the evidence if so required. 
(8) A decision made for the settlement of such a dispute shall be final 
and both the employer and the labour shall abide by such a decision.  
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in thi s Section , no  
work shall be stopped with the intention of causing  loss or damage, trouble to or 
satisfy enmity with the employer.  
(10) During the time when the work remains stopped purs uant to this 
Section, the employer may engage a labour in another work subject to the 
conditions of his or her service .  
77. Direction to stop the work: (1) Where it appears from the inspection or any other 
source that there exists a ground that an immediate  danger has arisen or is likely 
to arise in the safety and health of the labour or other person in the workplace of 
any enterprise, the Office may give direction to the employer to immediately stop 
the work in such a workplace. 
(2) A direction to be issued pursuant to sub-section ( 1) shall set out, 
inter alia, the reason and ground why such danger ha s so arisen. 
(3)  While issuing the direction pursuant to sub-section ( 1), the Office 
may, if it appears that it is not appropriate to ope rate or use any equipment in the 
workplace , issue an order forbidding the use of such equipment , and while so 
issuing the order, it may also affix a seal or Tancha  on such equipment or any part 
of it.  
(4) If the Office gives direction to stop a work pursu ant to sub-section 
(1), the employer shall immediately stop the work. 
(5) The employer who is not satisfied with a direction given by the 
Office pursuant to this Section may make an applicat ion to the Department within 
seven days of the receipt of such a direction.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
32 
 
(6) The Department shall settle the application made u nder sub-section 
(5) within fifteen days. 
(7) It is not allowed to do the work during the period r eferred to in sub-
section (6).  
Provided that if the Office gives information durin g that period that any 
immediate threat has not arisen to the safety and he alth of persons, the work may 
be resumed. 
78. Special provisions relating to occupational safety  and health: (1) The safety 
and health standards to be followed by the enterpris e engaged in the work relat ed 
to the following matters shall be as prescribed:  
(a) Provisions relating to protection of eyes, 
(b) Provisions relating to protection from chemical su bstance,  
(c) Provisions relating to operation of pressure plant s, 
(d) Provisions relating to safeguard of machines, 
(e) Provisions relating to lifting of load,  
(f) Other necessary provision s.  
(2) Provisions relating to the inspection of pressure plants and boilers 
shall be as prescribed.  
(3) Provisions relating to information about the estab lishment of any 
enterprise and other provisions relating to occupat ional safety and health shall be 
as prescribed.  
79. To give information:  Where any accident occurs or any person is injured o r dies 
in an accident or suffers from any occupational dis ease in the workplace, the 
employer shall give information thereof to the Offic e immediately.  
80. Arrangements for control of infectious diseases to  be made: (1) The employer 
shall make necessary arrangements for the prevention  and control of infectious 
diseases in the workplace. 
(2) If any labour suffering from any infectious disease needs to undergo 
treatment, he or she may be prevented from attendin g the work during the period 
of treatment.  
(3) Where the sick leave of such a labour is not suffi cient for treatment 
pursuant to sub-section (2), the employer may give di rection to that labour to make 
adjustment with any other leave or take the special unpaid leave.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
33 
 
(4) It shall be the duty of the concerned labour to abide  by the direction 
given pursuant to sub-section (3).  
81. To engage in easier work: (1) Where any female labour is pregnant, she shall 
give information thereof, accompanied also by a proo f showing her health check-
up, to the employer.  
(2) If the information referred to in sub-section (1) is received, the 
employer shall generally so engage such a female labour i n work that it does not 
cause any adverse effect on her health.  
82. Special provisions relating to treatment of occupa tional disease: (1) Where any 
labour suffers from any such occupational disease as prescribed while doing work 
of any enterprise, the enterprise shall provide the la bour with such treatment 
expense as prescribed for the treatment of such a disease and such amount of 
compensation as prescribed, if such a disease is incurable.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the 
enterprise shall not be required to provide the amo unt of treatment expense or 
compensation referred to in sub-section (1) if the labour is entitled to the amount 
of expense for the treatment of the occupational diseas e or compensation from the 
Social Security Fund.  
83. Direction may be issued: (1) The Office may make a sudden or periodic 
inspection as to whether or not the employer has mad e safety and health related 
arrangements .  
(2) If, while making inspecti on pursuant to sub-section (1), it is not 
found that the employer has made the arrangement on safety and health in the 
workplace as referred to in this Act or the prevailing law, the Office shall give a 
direction to the concerned employer specifying the pe riod for making arrangement 
thereof .  
Provided that if it appears that failure to make su ch arrangement 
immediate ly will cause danger to the safety and health of labou rs or other persons 
or adverse effect on the environment, it shall give  direction indicating the matter 
to make such arrangement immediately.  
(3) The Office may give direction to the employer to pro vide necessary 
information and details regarding any accident occur red in the workplace, 
occupational disease or safety and health of labours  and other persons .
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
34 
 
(4) It shall be the duty of the concerned employer to ab ide by or cause 
to be abided by the direction given pursuant to sub- section (2) or (3).  
 
Chapter- 13 
Provisions Relating to Industry or Service of Special Nature 
84. Provisions relating to tea-estate labours: (1) The obligations of the employers 
towards the tea-estate labours shall be as follows:  
(a) To make arrangement for suitable quarters within t he tea-estate for 
the labours who do not have their own settlement ne ar the tea-state 
and their dependent family members,  
(b) To make arrangement for free first-aid-service for  the treatment of 
minor injuries sustained by the labours and their de pendent family 
members and for trained medical staff, medical item s for that 
purpose,  
(c) To make arrangement for the easy availability of the  daily 
consumable goods if there is no market facility nea r the tea-estate, 
(d) To make proper arrangement for sports and entertainmen t for 
physical and mental development of the tea-estate la bours and their 
dependent family members. 
  Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, -  
(1) "Tea estate" means a tea-estate registered pursuan t to the 
prevailing law, and this term also includes a facto ry, other 
physical infrastructures established within the tea- estate and 
its premises.  
(2)  "Tea-estate labour" means a labour who does th e work of 
digging, ploughing, levelling, cutting, plucking, s cattering, 
sowing, collecting, uprooting or similar other work  in the 
land of a tea estate, and this term also includes a  labour who 
is engaged in tea processing and any other work of the  tea 
estate.  
(3) "Dependent family" means his or her family member wh o 
lives with a tea-estate labour and whom he or she h as to 
maintain.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
35 
 
(2) This Section shall not be deemed to bar the making of an agreement 
between the labour working in a tea-estate and the employer in relation to any 
work of the tea-estate to be performed .  
85. Special provisions relating to construction labour s: (1) The obligations of the 
employers towards the construction labours shall be as follows:  
(a) To provide such tools, equipment and material in a sufficient 
quantity as may be required for construction,  
(b) To make arrangement for temporary quarters to the l abours who do 
not have settlement near the construction workplace, c lean drinking 
water and supply of necessary food items,  
(c) To make appropriate safety arrangement in the construction 
workplace.  
Explanation:  For the purpose of this Section, -  
(1) "Construction work" means the construction of a building, 
road, bridge, canal, tunnel, internal or inter-stat e waterway, 
railway, construction work or construction of a power 
station, telecommunication, telephone or telegraphi c 
structure and similar other structure, and this ter m also 
includes installation of any machine, tool or equipm ent in 
that structure.  
(2) "Construction labour" means a labour who is engaged  in the 
construction work.  
(3) Any person or organization who tak es responsibility or contract for 
the construction work shall be deemed to be the emp loyer for the purpose of this 
Act. 
(4) When fixing the rate of remuneration and other ben efits for the 
construction labours, representation of the trade u nion of the concerned level and 
of the construction entrepreneurs’ a ssociation shall be compulsory.  
(5) Other provisions relating to the construction labo urs shall be as 
prescribed.  
86. Provisions relating to transport labours: (1) The obligations of the employers 
towards the transport labours shall be as follows:
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
36 
 
(a) To make compulsory provision for at least two driv ers to 
rotationally drive any motor vehicle transporting pas sengers in a 
long route, 
(b) To make arrangement for taking rest by drivers o f any motor vehicle 
operati ng in a long route in different places before reachin g the final 
destination, 
 (c) To provide a transport labour who is employed to wo rk for more 
than eight hours a day with remuneration at the rate  of 1.5 times of 
the remuneration receivable by the transpor t labour, 
  Provided that if a trip allowance, food allowance  or similar 
other allowance is to be provided to the transport labour, he or she 
shall be entitled to only one of such allowance and 1.5 times amount 
that he or she chooses. 
(d) If the motor vehicle breaks down before reaching t he final 
destination or is required to be stopped in one pla ce for any reason, 
the labour is to be provided with fifty percent of t he allowance 
receivable by him or her at the time when the motor vehicle is in 
running condition,  
(e) To keep in the motor vehicle such medicines and me dical treatment 
items as may be necessary for first-aid treatment .  
Explanation:  For the purpose of this Section, - 
(1) "Long route" means a long route determined pursuan t to the 
law.  
(2) “Transportation work” means the transportation by 
mechanical means of passengers, animals or goods from one 
place to another.  
(3) "Transport labour" means any labour engaged in the 
transportation work .  
(2) No transport labour who drives a motor vehicle sha ll consume 
alcoholic substance at least twelve hours before dr iving the vehicle until the final 
destination is reached.  
(3) A labour who acts contrary to sub-section (2) shall  be deemed to 
have committed a misconduct, and the concerned empl oyer may remove him or 
her from the service.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
37 
 
Provided that an opportunity to submit explanation s hall be provided to 
such a labour before so removing him or her from th e service.  
(4) If the employer wishes to remove any labour working in a motor 
vehicle in his or her ownership because of a change  in ownership effected from 
the sale of the vehicle or otherwise, the employer m ay terminate employment 
relation by providing him or her with such benefits as payable for retirement .  
Provided that this provision shall not apply to an e nterprise that operat es 
motor vehicles .  
87. Special provisions relating to tourism labours: (1) The obligations of the 
employers towards the tourism labours shall be as fo llows:  
(a) To provide sufficient quantity of medicines and med ical treatment 
items for first aid when sending labours to the wor kplace, 
(b) To rescue, or cause to be rescue d, without delay any labour who gets 
in an accident or serious health problem.  
(2) When sending a labour to the workplace as mentione d in sub-section 
(1), the employer shall provide the labour with any o ne of such facility out of a 
field allowance, food allowance or similar other al lowance or 1.5 times 
remuneration for overtime work that he or she choos es. 
(3) The employer operating any hotel, motel, restaura nt, jungle safari 
or other business shall distribute, as prescribed, the service fees collected pursuant 
to the collective agreement.  
88. Provisions relating to domestic labours:  (1) The Government of Nepal may fix 
separate minimum remuneration for domestic labours.   
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in thi s Act, 
provisions relating to public leave, weekly leave of  domestic labours and other 
provisions related thereto shall be as prescribed.  
(3) Where the employer has arranged for food and shelter of  a domestic 
labour in his or her house or assist ed in his or her study, the labour may deduct the 
amount for such purpose from the remuneration of th e labour .  
(4) The employer shall allow a domestic labour to celebra te festivals as 
per his or her culture, religion or tradition.  
89. Provisions relating to seasonal enterprises: (1) If any seasonal enterprise is 
closed during the off-season, the labours working i n such an enterprise shall be 
kept in reserve during the period of its closure.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
38 
 
Explanation:  For the purpose of this Section , the term “seasonal 
enterprise” means a n enterprise which can be operated in a particular sea son only, 
and this term also includes an enterprise which can not be operated for more than 
one hundred eighty days in a year.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in thi s Act, the 
employer shall provide a labour who is in regular em ployment with an amount 
equal to twenty-five percent of the remuneration to  which he or she is entitled 
during the period of off-season when the seasonal e nterprise remains closed .  
(3) If there arises a question o f whether or not any enterprise is a 
seasonal enterprise, it shall be as decided by the O ffice.  
90. Provisions relating to enterprise which is incorpo rated in foreign country and 
operates business in Nepal: If any foreign enterprise involved in the promotion 
of any business or sale of any goods or any other acti vity in Nepal violates the 
employment contract entered into with its representa tive or labour in Nepal, such 
a representative or labour may file a complaint to the  Office or Labour Court in 
accordance with th is Act. 
 
Chapter- 14 
Provisions Relating to Fair Labour Practice 
91. To observe fair labour practice: The employer, enterprise and trade union shall 
observe fair labour practice in their conduct with each other in the course of their 
respective activity.  
92. Deemed to be unfair labour practice : (1) The employer and trade union shall not 
commit, or cause to commit, any unfair labour practi ce referred to in sub-section 
(2) or (3).  
(2) If any employer does any of the following acts, the e mployer shall 
be deemed to have committed the unfair labour pract ice: 
(a) Not to comply with the labour law or cause such non -compliance,  
(b) To restrict the exercise of any right conferred by the labour law,  
(c) To create knowingly a false evidence with intent to  take action 
against any labour, 
(d) To commit any act with the sole intention to trouble o r harass a 
labour knowingly,
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
39 
 
(e) To interfere or cause interference in the formatio n, operation and 
administrative functions of the trade union, 
(f) To continue the lock-out declared unlawful,  
(g) To assault or manhandle any labour, 
(h)  To provoke or incite any labour with an intent to create enmity or 
animosity among the labours.  
(3) If the trade union commits any of the following act s, it shall be 
deemed to have committed the unfair labour practice : 
(a) To pressurize or threaten any labour to or not t o become a member 
of any union, 
(b) To collect donation or assistance forcibly,  
(c) To picket or surround the employer’s private residence or other 
enterprise except the workplace or causing such pic keting or 
surrounding, 
(d) To assault the employer or his or her representative or any labour or 
do any other illegal activity in order to have their demand fulfilled 
or causing such assault or activity, 
(e)  To commit any act of damaging the employer’s property 
intentionally. 
 
Chapter- 15 
Provisions Relating to Inspection  
93. Provisions relating to Office and inspectors: (1) The Government of Nepal may, 
for the implementation of this Act and prevailing N epal law on labour, establish 
such Labour Offices as may be required. 
(2) The districts which fall within the jurisdiction o f the Labour Offices 
established pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be as  specified by the Ministry.  
(3) The Government of Nepal may, by a notification in the Nepal 
Gazette, appoint one inspector or more than one ins pectors for any area according 
to the need.  
94. Powers, functions and duties of the Office: (1) The powers, functions and duties 
of the Office shall be as follows:  
(a) To carry out monitoring as to whether or not the mi nimum 
remuneration, allowance fixed pursuant to this Act or benefits
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
40 
 
receivable pursuant to the collective agreement and  the rights 
conferred by the prevailing Nepal law to the labours  and employers 
have been implemented,  
(b) T o carry out regular monitoring as to whether or not there has been 
effective implementation of this Act and the rules fra med under this 
Act, and give necessary direction to the concerned party for their 
implementation, 
(c) T o give trainings on the standards and codes of conduc t made 
pursuant to this Act and other prevailing labour la ws, and carry out 
regular monitoring as to whether or not such standa rds or codes of 
conduct have been implemented, 
(d)  To provide necessary technical assistance to lab ours and employers 
if such assistance is sought for conducting necessa ry trainings, 
(e)  To give direction to the employer to provide th e occupational safety 
and health standards or employee bye-laws rules or ot her relevant 
documents,  
(f) T o implement the collective agreement entered into bet ween the 
employer and labour s and arbitral awards, 
(g) To inspect as to whether or not children have been  employed , and 
immediately rescue them if found employed and take ac tion against 
such an employer, 
(h)  T o make inspection as to whether or not the employer ha s 
implemented the provisions relating to occupational  safety and 
health provisions referred to in Chapter-12 in the enterprise and 
workplace, 
(i) To observe or inspect the machine, tool, equipment , goods or 
material installed in the workplace, and examine wh ether or not such 
machine, tool, equipment, goods or material are of prescribed 
standard s, and collect samples thereof if the same needs to b e tested,  
(j) To make, or cause to be made, periodic or casual i nspection of the 
enterprise or workplace,  
(k) To order the concerned enterprise or its office-be arers to provide 
any register, deed and document including the electr onic record 
maintained in the enterprise or workplace, and take  control of the
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
41 
 
original register, deed or document or a copy thereo f upon entering 
such an or workplace in the event of failure to so provide, 
(l) T o obtain informati on or notice on necessary matters from the 
employer, managerial level labour or other labour of  the enterprise, 
(m)  I f it appears so necessary, to summon the employer, mana gerial 
level labour or other labour of the enterprise to a ppear in the Office 
and take his or her statement,  
(n) If such information is received during the inspect ion of the 
workplace or enterprise or from any other source tha t the employer 
or labour or trade union has acted contrary to this Act and the rules 
framed under this Act, to give necessary direction t o immediately 
rectify such an act,  
(o) To maintain records of the applications or documents r eceived in 
the Office or information received from any other so urces, give 
evidence of the registration of such applications o r documents or 
maintain records of the decisions, orders and deeds  of mediation or 
provide a certified copy of any document to one who requests for 
the same,  
(p) T o perform such other functions as specified by this Ac t and 
prevailing Nepal law to be performed by the Office, or 
(q) T o perform such other functions as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Office may, if it appears necessary to obtain a ssistance of the 
local administration, police or any other body in exe rcising the power referred to 
in this Section, request the local administration, police or concerned body to render 
such assistance. 
(3) It shall be the duty of the local administration, police  and concerned 
body to render such assistance to the Office if so r equested pursuant to sub-section 
(2). 
95. Powers, functions and duties of inspector: (1) Performance of such functions 
and duties and exercise of such powers as to be per formed and exercised by the 
Office shall be made by the inspector and subordina te employee as prescribed. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), if this Act 
or other law so mentions any function as to be perfo rmed by the occupational 
safety and health inspector himself or herself, the occupational safety and health
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
42 
 
inspector shall have the power to perform for and o n behalf of the Office such 
function or inspection of the machineries and tools  of the factor, occupational 
safety and health related function and other technic al function.  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section  shall be deemed to bar 
any Office from engaging any occupational safety and health inspector serving in 
another office or a technician having knowledge in the concerned subject in the 
function of inspection and the labour inspector fro m performing the function 
accordingly, for and on its behalf, if the Office ha s no occupational safety and 
health inspector. 
96. Obligations of inspector or employee: (1) The obligations of the inspector or 
employee deputed to inspect any enterprise or workpla ce pursuant to Section 95 
shall be as follows:  
(a) To enter any enterprise or workplace only after show ing his or her 
identity card,  
(b) T o give a written receipt thereof while taking custody of any 
register, document, record or goods,  
(c) To keep the identity of any complainant confidential  if he or she 
requests to do so,  
(d) T o perform the duties of his or her office without cau sing hinderance 
in the work of the enterprise or workplace,  
(e) To keep such notice, information or data as received during 
inspection confidential except as required to be di sclosed in 
accordance with the law.  
(2) Where the inspector or any employee who is deputed t o inspect any 
enterprise or workplace fails to perform the duties  referred to in sub-section (1) , 
does any act that is disrespectful or contrary to the  duties of his or her office or 
causes any loss or damage by doing any act with mala f ide intention, the concerned 
person shall give information thereof to the compet ent authority through the 
Office.  
(3) If the inspector or employee is found guilty upon ma king necessary 
inquiry pursuant to sub-section (2), the competent a uthority may take departmental 
action pursuant to the prevailing law.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
43 
 
97. To render necessary assistance: It shall be the duty of the concerned employer, 
labour and trade union to render necessary assistance to  the inspector or employee 
deputed to inspect the enterprise or workplace in t he function of inspection. 
98. Report to be submitted: The inspector or employee shall submit a report sett ing 
out such particulars as prescribed to the Office wi thin fifteen days from the date 
of completion of the inspection of the enterprise o r workplace made pursuant to 
this Chapter, except as otherwise directed.  
99. Power of the Office to give direction:  (1) On receipt of the report pursuant to 
Section 98, the Office may, upon studying it as requi red, give direction  
immediately to make the improvement, if any, required  to be made in relation to 
any work, working procedure or other matter of the e nterprise or workplace or 
labour or trade union and stop any act, if any, being  committed contrary to law. 
(2) A party who is not satisfied with the direction ref erred to in sub-
section (1) may make an appeal to the Labour Court within thir ty-five days. 
(3) The decision made by the Labour Court on the appeal made pursuant 
to sub-section (2) shall be final.  
100. Labour audit to be made: (1) Each enterprise shall make a labour audit as 
prescribed as to whether or not acts and actions ar e being performed by the 
enterprise in accordance with this Act, Regulation and prevailing law and prepare 
a report thereof.  
(2) The report referred to in sub-section (1) shall be  provided to the 
Office or inspector during inspection made pursuant  to this Chapter or as and when 
so demanded by the Office or inspector. 
101. Making application in convenient Office: A labour of any enterprise with its 
branch or workplace in an area where there are more than one Office may make 
an application to the Office which is convenient to him or her, and the concerned 
Office shall, on receipt of such an application, conduct  hearing on the application.  
 
Chapter- 16 
Provisions Relating to Council and Committee 
102. Formation of Central Labour Advisory Council: (1) There shall be formed a 
Central Labour Advisory Council as follows for givi ng advice on labour matters 
to the Government of Nepal:
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
44 
 
(a) Minister or Minister of State for Labour and 
Employment 
 
- Chairperson 
(b) Secretary, Ministry of Finance -Member 
(c) Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment -Member 
(d) Secretary, Ministry of Physical Infrastructure and 
Transport 
-Member 
(e) Secretary, Ministry of Agricultural Development -Member 
(f) Secretary, Ministry of Industry -Member 
(g) Secretary, Ministry of Health -Member 
(h) Director General, Department of Labour -Member 
(i) Executive Director, Social Security Fund   -Member 
(j) Executive Director, Vocational Skill Development 
Training Centre 
-Member 
(k) Five persons including at least two women 
nominated as prescribed by the Ministry from 
amongst the employers 
-Member 
(l) Five persons including at least two women 
nominated as prescribed by the Ministry from 
amongst the trade union federations 
-Member 
(m) Joint Secretary (Responsible for the concerned 
Division), Ministry of Labour and Employment 
-Member- 
Secretary 
 
(2) The tenure of the members referred to in clauses ( k) and (l) of sub-
section (1) shall be three years, and they may be re-n ominated. 
(3) While nominating the members pursuant to clauses ( k) and (l) of 
sub-section (1), the Ministry shall make nomination on t he recommendation of the 
employers ’ association, in case of employers, and of the Joint  Trade Union 
Coordination Centre, in case of trade union federat ions .  
(4) The members referred to in clauses (k) and (l) of sub-section (1) 
may nominate their alternative members to take part , in their absence, in the 
meetings of the Council.  
103. Functions, duties and powers of the Council : (1) The functions, duties and 
powers of the Council shall be as follows:
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
45 
 
(a) T o give advice and suggestions to the Government of Ne pal on 
labour policies, 
(b)  T o give necessary advice and suggestions to the Governm ent of 
Nepal for making timely reforms in the labour laws,  
(c)  T o give suggestions to the Government of Nepal in rela tion to the 
ratification and implementation of any labour relate d international 
convention to which Nepal is a party, 
(d)  T o give advice and suggestions to the Government of Ne pal in 
relation to the report to be submitted by the Govern ment of Nepal 
under any labour related international convention to  which Nepal is 
a party, 
(e)  To prepare occupational safety and health stand ards and 
recommend the same to the Government of Nepal,  
(f) To prepare codes of conduct on fair labour practice an d recommend 
the same to the Government of Nepal,  
(g) T o give advice and suggestions to the Government of Ne pal for the 
formulation of policies concerning vocational train ing and skill 
development (apprentice) training,  
(h) T o make necessary coordination with the Government of N epal, 
employers and trade unions for maintaining industria l peace, sound 
industrial relation and minimizing labour disputes,   
(i) T o make necessary coordination with the Government of N epal, 
employers and trade unions for enhancing employment a nd 
productivity, 
(j) To frame and issue directives on collective bargai ning as required, 
and  
(k) To perform such other functions as prescribed. 
(2) The Council may form any committee or taskforce, as required, for 
the performance of its functions.  
(3) The functions, duties and powers of the committee or taskforce 
formed pursuant to sub-section (2) shall be as specified by the Council at the time 
of formation of such a committee.  
(4) The secretariat of the Council shall be located in the Ministry.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
46 
 
104. Office of member of the Council to be vacant: (1) The office of any member of 
the Council referred to in clause (k) or (l) of sub -section (1) of Section 102 shall 
become vacant in the following circumstance: 
(a) If the member submits resignation in writing to  the Ministry through 
the chairperson, 
(b)  If the member remains absent from three consec utive meetings of 
the Council without giving any notice, 
Provided that this provision shall not apply if the alternative 
member attends the meeting. 
(c) If his or her tenure expires, or 
(d)  If he or she dies.  
(2) Before removing any member of the Council from his or her office 
pursuant to clause (b) of sub-section (1), he or sh e shall be provided with an 
opportunity to defend.  
(3) Where the office of any member falls vacant pursuan t to sub-section 
(1), nomination of another person shall be made for  the remainder of tenure from 
the same sector where that member was nominated from and by following the same  
procedure. 
105. Provisions relating to meetings of the Council : (1) Meetings of the Council shall 
be held as required at the date, place and time specified by the chairpers on of the 
Council.  
Provided that the interval between the two meetings  shall not be more than 
four months.  
(2) The chairperson shall call a meeting within fiftee n days if one fourth 
of the total number of members of the Council makes a written request for calling 
a meeting.  
(3) The member-secretary of the Council shall give a no tice along with 
the agenda of the meeting to all the members at least tw enty-four hours in advance 
of the time when such meeting is scheduled.  
(4) The presence of more than at least fifty percent of  the total number 
of members, representing the Government of Nepal, e mployers and trade unions, 
shall constitute a quorum for the meeting of the Co uncil.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
47 
 
(5) The chairperson of the Council shall preside over the meeting of the 
Council, and in his or her absence, the secretary of  the Ministry shall preside it 
over.  
(6) A labour expert may be invited at the meeting of the Council.  
(7) Any decision of the Council shall be taken on the b asis of consensus.  
(8) If consensus is not reached pursuant to sub-section ( 7), a decision 
shall be taken on the basis of majority of the membe rs representing the 
Government of Nepal, employers and unions.  
(9) There shall be maintained a separate minute book for recording the 
decisions of the meetings of the Council, and such decisions shall be authenticated 
by the member-secretary of the Council.  
(10) Other procedures relating to the meeting of the Co uncil shall be as 
determined by the Council itself.  
(11) Members of the Council shall get such meeting allo wance as 
specified by the Government of Nepal.  
106. Fixation of minimum remuneration: (1) The Ministry shall, on recommendation 
of the Minimum Remuneration Fixation Committee refe rred to in Section 107, fix 
the minimum remuneration of labours in every two years.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the Ministry 
may fix the minimum remuneration in the event of failure of the Minimum Wage 
Fixation Committee referred to in Section 107 to re commend the minimum 
remuneration due to absence of consensus. 
(3) The Ministry shall publish the minimum remuneration  fixed 
pursuant to this Section in the Nepal Gazette.  
(4) The minimum remuneration fixed pursuant to sub-sec tion (3) shall 
come into force on the first day of the new financia l year. 
Provided that if it is otherwise agreed between the  trade union and the 
employer concerning the date of coming into force of  the minimum remuneration , 
it shall come into force accordingly.  
(5) When fixing the minimum remuneration in accordance  with other 
prevailing law, such remuneration shall not be so f ixed as to be less than the 
remuneration fixed pursuant to this Act.  
107. Minimum remuneration fixation committee: (1) The Ministry shall form a 
permanent minimum remuneration fixation committee as pr escribed, consisting of
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
48 
 
representatives from the Government of Nepal, trade  unions and employers' 
associations for the purpose of recommending the mi nimum remuneration of 
labours .  
(2) The committee formed pursuant to sub-section (1) m ay, while 
recommending the minimum remuneration of labour s, recommend the minimum 
remuneration of labours applicable for the whole of  Nepal or for enterprises or 
industries of any specific sector or nature or speci fic sector of employment. 
(3) The grounds for recommendation of the minimum remu neration 
shall be determined by the minimum remuneration fix ation committee itself 
referred to in sub-section (1).  
(4) The minimum remuneration fixation committee referr ed to in sub-
section (1) shall commence the process of reviewing  the minimum remuneration 
from the month of Baishak (mid April) in every two years.  
(5) Procedures and other provisions relating to the me etings of the 
committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall be a s prescribed.  
 
Chapter- 17 
Provisions Relating to Internal Management of Enter prise  
108. Internal management may be made: (1) Every enterprise may, for the purpose 
of its internal management, make a bye-law as requi red.  
(2) Any enterprise, when making a bye-law on service, conditions and 
benefits of labours, or any competent body to approv e the bye- law made by any 
enterprise, when approving such a bye-law, shall do so make or approve as not to 
be contrary to the minimum standards set forth in th is Act and the collective 
agreement.  
(3) The Ministry may, for the purpose of sub-section (1) , make a model 
bye-law as required.  
Provided that it shall not be deemed to bar the Nep al Rastra Bank, in the 
case of banks and financial institutions, and the r egulatory authority, in the case 
of other enterprises , from making bye-law s. 
(4) One copy of the bye-law made by an enterprise shall be registered 
in the Office, such a bye-law shall be made availab le to any labour if he or she 
wishes to look at .
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
49 
 
(5) The enterprise shall, when making or amending the bye-law, consult 
the authorised trade union, if any, in the enterpris e and a n active trade union if 
there is no such authorized trade union .  
(6) Where any provision of the bye-law made by the enter prise 
contradicts with this Act, prevailing laws or colle ctive agreement, the court may 
void such a provision of the bye-law or give other appropriate o rder.  
109. Transfer may be made: (1) The enterprise may transfer a labour from one offic e, 
branch or unit of the enterprise to another office,  branch or unit without causing 
any adverse effect on the conditions of service and benefits of him or her and 
without making difference in the nature and level o f his or her work. 
  (2) Provided that transfer may be made in a manner t o make difference 
in the nature and level of work in the following ci rcumstance: 
(a) With the consent of the concerned labour,  
(b) Where the labour is promoted and place d, 
(c) As mentioned in the collective agreement, or 
(d)  To transfer the labour to other work related t o the training or skill 
or educational qualification acquired by him or her .  
(2) Any labour employed in any one enterprise may, with h is or her 
consent, be transferred to another enterprise. 
(3) When making transfer pursuant to sub-section (2), an agreement 
shall be made as prescribed between the enterprise making transfer and the 
enterprise where the labour is transferred to on the matter that the service peri od 
of the employee to be so transferred shall be added and the enterprise where the 
labour is transferred to shall bear all benefits to  the receivable on the basis of the 
service period and on other conditions of service. 
(4) When transferring any labour from the workplace lo cated in the 
place of his or her permanent residence or to any ot her place from the existing 
workplace, the employer shall provide benefits as pr escribed.  
110. To be deputed as representative: (1) Any enterprise may depute its labour to 
another enterprise to work in the capacity of its re presentative. 
(2) Except as otherwise agreed when making deputation pursuant to 
sub-section (1) , the obligations relating to the service and benefit s of such a labour 
shall be vested in the enterprise making such deput ation.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
50 
 
111. Formation of labour relation committee: (1) The employer of an enterprise 
where ten or more than ten labour s work shall form a labour relation committee as 
prescribed.  
(2) The functions, duties and powers of the committee formed pursuant 
to sub-section (1) shall be as follows:  
(a) To hold discussion as required for productivity inc rement 
and improvement in the operating system, 
 (b) To make an effort to settle any grievance in discus sion with 
the concerned party if the labour has or is likely to have s uch 
a grievance, 
(c) To improve the working environment of the workp lace, 
(d) To function in the capacity of occupational safet y and health 
committee until it is formed, and  
(e) To perform such other functions as prescribed.  
(3) The labour relation committee referred to in sub-s ection (1) shall 
meet as required without adversely affecting the wor king hours of the enterprise.  
(4) Provisions relating to the formation, procedure an d meeting of the 
committee shall be as prescribed.  
112. Performance evaluation of labours by enterpris e: (1) An enterprise may have 
performance evaluation of its labour s generally once in a year.  
(2) The basis and procedure for the performance evalua tion referred to 
in sub-section (1) shall be determined in a just an d reasonable manner. 
(3) The basis and procedure referred to in sub-section  (2) shall be 
notified to the labours before the period for the p erformance evaluation 
commences .  
(4) Upon completion of the performance evaluation purs uant to sub-
section (1), the employer or the person designated by him or  her shall discuss with 
the concerned labour about his or her strengths and  weakness es and give a 
reasonable opportunity to improve the weaknesses.  
(5) Where the concerned labour disagrees with the eval uation made 
pursuant to sub-section (4), such a labour shall be  required to sign the evaluation 
form after providing him or her with an opportunity to note down disagreement.  
(6) Where a labour notes down disagreement pursuant to  sub-section 
(5), the enterprise shall make a provision for its review.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
51 
 
(7) Other provisions relating to the performance evalu ation of the 
labours shall be as prescribed. 
 
Chapter- 18 
Settlement of Individual Disputes 
113. Submission of individual claim s: (1) If any labour has an individual claim on any 
matter related to the right conferred by this Act, Regulation, prevailing laws or 
collective agreement, such a labour may make an appl ication in writing to the 
employer.  
(2) In the event of receipt of the application referre d to in sub-section 
(1), the employer shall receive the application and give its receipt to the labour .  
(3) In the event of receipt of the application referre d to in sub-section 
(1), the employer shall settle the dispute relating to such a claim within fifteen 
days upon holding discussion with the concerned labour. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 3), the period 
for the settlement of dispute may be extended throug h consent between the 
employer and the labour .  
114. Application may be made to the Office: (1) The concerned party may, in the 
following circumstance, make an application to the Office for the settlement by 
mediation of the individual claim referred to in Se ction 113:  
(a) If the employer does not give a notice for discussion within seven 
days from the date on which the application was made pursuant to 
sub-section (1) of Section 113, or 
(b) Failing an agreement upon discussion held pursuant  to sub-section 
(3) of Section 113, after fifteen days from the date  on which the 
original application was made to the employer .  
(2) In the event of receipt of the application pursuant to sub-section (1), 
the Office shall give the concerned employer and the  labour a notice specifying 
the date and time for discussion .  
(3) The Office shall settle the dispute relating to th e claim within 
twenty-one days from the date of receipt of the application  pursuant to sub section 
(1), by holding negotiations as required between the  employer and the labour .
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
52 
 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 3), the period 
for the settlement of dispute may be extended throug h consent between the Office, 
employer and labour .  
(5) If an agreement is reached between the concerned em ployer and the 
labour upon the negotiations referred to in sub-sec tion (3), such a dispute relating 
to the claim shall be deemed to have been settled.  
(6) The agreement reached pursuant to sub-section (5) shall be binding 
on the concerned party .  
115. Decision to be made by the Office: Where the problem could not be solved 
pursuant to Section 114, the Office shall, on the b asis of the available evidence, 
make a decision within fifteen days.  
 
Chapter- 19 
Settlement of Collective Disputes  
116. Collective claim may be submitted: (1) Any enterprise employing ten or more 
than ten labours shall have a collective bargaining  committee as follows:  
(a) A team of negotiating representatives designated on b ehalf of the 
elected authorized trade union of the enterprise,  
(b) In cases where election to the authorised trade union referred to in 
clause (a) could not be held or where election has been held but its 
term has expired, a team of negotiating representat ives nominated 
through mutual agreement of all the unions in the e nterprise,  
(c) In cases where there is no authorised trade union referred to in 
clause (a) or team referred to in clause (b), a team of re presentatives 
supported with the signatures of more than sixty per cent of the 
labours working in the enterprise.  
(2) The collective bargaining committee may submit coll ective claims 
or demands in writing to the employer on issues rela ting to the interest of the 
labours.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2), no 
collective claims or demands may be submitted on the  following matters:  
(a) A matter which is contrary to the Constitution of Nepal, 
(b) A matter which contains an allegation with no evidenc e or basis and 
is thus contrary to the interest of any one,
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
53 
 
(c) A matter which affects the personal conduct of any employer or 
labour, 
(d) A matter which is not related to the enterprise, 
(e)  Until the period specified in this Act lapses in cases where the 
collective agreement has been made, 
(f) A matter relating to the rate of contribution and benefits specified 
for the social security scheme. 
(4) The collective bargaining committee may consist of a maximum of 
three to eleven members as prescribed, on the basis  of the number of labours .  
(5) The collective bargaining committee formed pursuan t to this 
Section shall have the powers including that to sub mit collective claims or 
demands, enter into agreement, file a case against any person or defend a case.  
117. To hold negotiations on collective claims , demands: (1) In the event of 
submission of collective claims, demands pursuant t o Section 116, the concerned 
employer shall, not later than seven days of the date  of submission of such claims 
or demands, give a notice in writing to the collect ive bargaining committee, stating 
inter alia  the venue and time for negotiation .  
(2) Where a notice is given pursuant to sub-section (1), t he members of 
the collective bargaining committee shall be presen t for negotiations at the venue 
and time stated in the notice.  
(3) If, while conducting negotiations, any understandin g or agreement 
is reached between both the parties, the disputes r elating to the collective claims, 
demands shall be settled .  
(4) The understanding or agreement made pursuant to su b-section (3) 
shall be binding for the concerned parties.  
118. Settlement through mediation: (1) The concerned party may, in the following 
circumstance, make an application to the Office for  the settlement of collective 
claims, demands through mediation:  
(a) Where the employer fails to give a notice to the co llective 
bargaining committee for negotiations within the pe riod referred to 
in sub-section (1) of Section 117 , or  
(b) Where an agreement could not be reached upon negot iation held 
pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 117 not late r than twenty-one 
days from the date of submission of claims , demands.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
54 
 
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to bar the ex tending 
of the said period with the consent of the parties in cases where the 
negotiation is going on .  
(2) In the event of receipt of an application pursuant  to sub-section (1), 
the Office shall summon the presence of the concern ed parties and settle the 
dispute through mediation.  
(3) The mediation proceeding referred to in sub-sectio n (2) shall be 
completed not later than thirty days from the date of  receipt by the Office of the 
application.  
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to bar the ex tending of the said 
period with the consent of the parties in cases whe re the negotiation is going on.  
(4) The dispute relating to the collective claims, dem ands shall be 
settled if an agreement is reached between both the  parties upon the negotiation 
held in presence of the Office pursuant to sub-sect ion (3).  
(5) The agreement made pursuant to sub-section (4) sha ll be binding for 
the concerned parties.  
119. Settlement of dispute through arbitration: (1) Where mediation does not 
succeed pursuant to Section 118, the dispute relati ng to the collective claims, 
demands shall, in the following circumstance, be se ttled through arbitration:  
(a) If the collective bargaining committee and the em ployer agree to 
settle the dispute relating to collective claims, dem ands through 
arbitration, 
(b) If a collective dispute arises in an enterprise  providing essential 
services, 
(c) If a collective dispute arises in an enterprise  within the special 
economic zone, or  
(d) If the strike is prohibited by imposition of a state of emergency in 
accordance with the Constitution. 
Explanation:  For the purpose of this Chapter, the term “ essential 
service ” means any service which may, if interrupted, have an  
adverse impact on the life, health and safety of the  people across the 
country or the people living in any part of the count ry.  
(2) Where the Ministry has a ground to believe that a f inancial crisis 
may arise in the country as a result of ongoing or po ssible strike or lockout or that
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
55 
 
the dispute needs to be settled by arbitration, the Ministry may give an order for 
the settlement of any collective dispute through arb itration irrespective of the stage 
of such a dispute.  
(3) For the purpose of sub-sections (1) and (2), the M inistry may form 
an arbitration panel comprising representations fro m the labour, employer and 
Government of Nepal.  
(4) Expenses of the arbitration panel to be formed pur suant to sub-
section (3) shall be borne by the Government of Nep al as prescribed.  
(5) Any party wishing to have the dispute settled throug h arbitration 
shall submit claims in writing to the arbitrator as  prescribed.  
(6) On receipt of the claims referred to in sub-sectio n (5), the arbitrator 
shall send a copy of such claims to the other party a nd provide an opportunity to 
such party to submit counter-claims in that respect.  
(7) In conducting the proceeding referred to in this S ection, the 
arbitrator may consult or discuss with any expert.  
(8) Hearing shall be conducted at such date, time and place specified by 
the arbitrator, and the arbitration proceeding shal l not sojourn for the sole reason 
that any party has remained absent or counter-claim has not been submitted .  
(9) The arbitrator shall make award not later than thi rty days from the 
date of completion of the hearing pursuant to sub-s ection (8). 
(10) The arbitrator may exercise such powers as the cour t has under the 
prevailing laws in relation to the matters includin g examining the evidence, taking 
depositions of witnesses, making on-site inspection s, in connection with the 
proceeding.  
(11) Except as otherwise provided for in the agreement by the parties, 
other provisions relating to the arbitral proceedin g shall be as determined by the 
arbitrator.  
120. Power to form labour arbitration tribunal: (1) The Government of Nepal may 
form an independent labour arbitration tribunal for  having mediation and 
arbitration with regard to the collective dispute. 
(2) Where a labour arbitration tribunal is formed purs uant to sub-
section (1), the labour arbitration tribunal shall conduct the mediation and 
arbitration proceedings referred to in this Chapter .
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
56 
 
(3) Other provisions relating to the labour arbitratio n tribunal shall be 
as prescribed.  
121. Right to strike for settlement of collective d ispute s: (1) The collective 
bargaining committee may, if any of the following circumstances exists, organize  
a strike for the settlement of any collective dispute:   
(a) I f there exists no circumstance requiring compulsory ar bitration 
pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 119,  
(b) I f the arbitrator fails to perform the arbitral functi ons, 
(c)  If an arbitration panel could not be formed wi thin twenty- one days 
from the date of application to the Ministry or decision is not made 
requiring arbitration,  
(d) I f award is not given by the arbitrator within the pre scribed time, 
(e) If the employer refuses to enforce the arbitral award or challenges 
such an award on legal grounds, 
(f) If, except where compulsory arbitration is to be ma de, any party 
disagrees with the arbitral award pursuant to sub-s ection (2) of 
Section 122.  
(2) In order to make a strike pursuant to sub-section (1), a written notice 
along with the claims, demands, and also specifying  the date from which the strike 
is to commence shall be submitted to the employer in  advance of thirty days , and 
information thereof shall also be given to the loca l administration and the 
concerned Labour Office.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in th is Act, if the 
Ministry gives an order for the settlement of the di spute through arbitration 
pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 119 after th e notice on strike is given or the 
strike is commenced pursuant to sub-section (2), th ey shall postpone such a strike 
and participate in the arbitral process. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in th is Act, the 
labours deputed as sentries and guards for the secu rity of the enterprise shall not 
be allowed to participate in the strike and do any a ct referred to in Section 125 
during the time when they are assigned on duty .  
122. Arbitral award and collective agreement to be binding: (1) If any collective 
dispute is settled through compulsory arbitration pu rsuant to sub-section (1) of 
Section 119, the arbitral award shall be binding on the concerned parties.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
57 
 
(2) If any party to any dispute referred to arbitration in pursuance of the 
order by the Ministry pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 119 who is not 
satisfied with the arbitral award on the dispute fails  to node down disagreement in 
writing to the arbitrator not later than five worki ng days from the date of the award , 
such an award shall also ipso facto be binding on t he concerned party after the 
expiration of that period.  
(3) The collective agreement and arbitral award need to be re gistered in 
the Office for record and enforcement thereof.  
(4) The collective agreement shall remain valid for tw o years from the 
date of its entry into force, if any, specified in the  agreement itself and, failing the 
specification of such a date, from the date of sign ing of the agreement and from 
the date of the arbitral award, if any, made, and sh all be valid as of law.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 4), the 
provisions in the collective agreement or arbitral award shall continue to apply 
unless and until it is amended or repealed by anoth er collective agreement or 
arbitral award.  
123. Special provisions relating to the submission of collective claims, demands: 
(1) Trade union associations which are active in th e tea estate, carpet sector, 
construction business, labour provider, transportation  sector or any other group of 
manufacturers producing similar nature of goods or service providers providing 
similar nature of service or business as prescribed  may form a collective 
bargaining committee as prescribed and submit colle ctive bargaining claims, 
demands to the employers' association of the concer ned group of industries.  
(2) The manner of submitting claims, demands referred to in sub-
section (1), procedure relating to collective barga ining and provisions relating to 
the agreement shall be as prescribed.  
(3) In the case of the enterprise to which the collect ive agreement 
referred to in this Section is applicable, no colle ctive claims, demands and 
agreement may be submitted and made pursuant to this  Chapter.  
(4)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4) of Section 
122, the Ministry may issue an order that collective  claims , demands and 
negotiations should be submitted and held within a specified time. In the event of 
issuance of such an order, it may happen earlier or later than the time specified in 
the same sub-section of the same Section .
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
58 
 
124. Right to lock-outs:  (1) Where a strike is organized or continued witho ut giving a 
notice pursuant to this Act or the collective dispu te could not be settled through 
the procedure referred to in th is Act, the management may, by giving justifiable 
grounds, lock out the enterprise by obtaining approval of the Department.  
(2) Before making a lock-out pursuant to sub-section ( 1), the manager 
shall issue a notice in advance of at least seven d ays, also specifying the date of 
lock-out, for information to the labour s that if the strike is not ended the lock-out 
will be made.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), 
where there is a possibility of causing loss to the enterprise because of gherao, 
riot, physical unrest etc. by the labours during the period of strike, the management 
may lock out the enterprise. If the lock-out is so made , information along with the 
justification for making such lock-out shall be giv en to the Office or Department 
and the local administration not later than three d ays.  
(4) On receipt of the notice pursuant to sub-section ( 3), the local 
administration shall immediately make necessary secur ity arrangement in such a 
workplace.  
(5) The Department may at any time declare the lock-out of any 
enterprise illegal in case it appears to be unjusti fiable or it is likely to disturb the 
peace and security of the country or it is contrary to  the economic interest of the 
country.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in thi s Section , no 
lock-out may be made in an enterprise that operates any essential service.  
125. Picketing or assembly may be made: (1) With the objective of exerting pressure 
to have fulfilled the demands when the strike or lo ck-out is continuing, the labour s 
may picket or assemble at the main entrance of the w orkplace or enterprise 
peacefully.  
(2) In any circumstance other than the circumstance wh ere strike or 
lockout, they may picket or assemble before or after the working hours or during 
the rest time without disturbing the work of the workplace or enterprise.  
(3) Even in cases where picketing or assembly is made purs uant to sub-
section (1), the labour s may not do any act and action such as prohibiting ot hers 
from entering or leaving the workplace or enterpris e or causing any loss or damage 
to the workplace.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
59 
 
126. Employment contract not to be violated: No labour shall be deemed to have 
violated the employment contract by the reason that h e or she has made a strike, 
lock-out or picketing or made a complaint in accord ance with the law, and during 
that period, the employment contract shall be deemed to  continue to be effective.  
127. Remuneration for strike or lock-out period: (1) Any labour who makes a strike 
in a manner to be contrary to the prevailing law sha ll not be entitled to any 
remuneration for the period of such a strike.  
(2) Labours shall be entitled to full remuneration for th e period of lock-
out if such lock-out is made by the employer in a man ner to be contrary to the 
prevailing law.  
(3) If the collective agreement contains any agreement in rela tion to the 
remuneration, the matter shall be governed accordin gly; and failing such 
agreement to that effect, the labour shall get half  the remuneration for the period 
of strike or lock-out made in fulfilment of the pro cedure of this Act.  
(4) If there arises any dispute as to whether any strik e or lockout made 
in an enterprise is contrary to law or not, the Depa rtment shall conduct necessary 
inquiry and make decision not later than thirty-five d ays. 
128. Prohibition on filing of case against loss: (1) Where any financial loss is caused 
to the employer or labour because of a strike, picketing or lock-out made in 
fulfilment of the procedures referred to in this Ac t, no case may be filed in any 
court against any labour , collective bargaining committee, trade union or emp loyer 
involved in such a strike, picketing or lock-out in relation to such a  loss.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), if a ny 
person or group makes destruction or arson in the wor kplace or destruction of any 
property in any other manner or caus es physical damage, the amount equivalent to 
the loss, damage may be recovered from such a person  or group.  
129. Collective bargaining or agreement to be made in good faith : (1) The trade 
union or collective bargaining committee or employer  shall, in making a collective 
bargaining or collective agreement, do so in good f aith.  
(2) Other provisions relating to the collective bargai ning o r agreement 
shall be as prescribed.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
60 
 
Chapter- 20 
Provisions Relating to Conduct and Punishment  
130. Observance of discipline and duties: It shall be the duty of each labour to 
observe discipline and fulfil duties referred to in  this Act or the rules framed under 
this Act or the by-law.  
131. Misconduct and punishment: (1) If a labour commits the following misconduct, 
he or she may be reprimanded: 
(a) To remain absent from the work without having a le ave sanctioned, 
(b) To leave the workplace without obtaining permis sion of the 
management, 
(c)  To appear late in work frequently without obtai ning permission, 
(d) To disobey any order given in relation to the wo rk by the employer 
or any employee superior in level to him or her, 
(e) To commit such other misconduct as specified in  the bye-law.  
(2) In the event of commission of any of the followi ng misconducts, 
remuneration equal to a maximum of one day may be ded ucted: 
(a) To refuse to receive any letter or notice given  by the employer or 
sentencing authority,  
(b) To take part in an illegal strike or force others to do so or make delay 
or slow in work collectively,  
(c) To cause loss or damage to the enterprise by dec reasing the 
production or service recklessly or negligently, 
(d) To make attempt to take benefits by submitting false d ocuments, 
(e) To not use the equipment provided by the employer  if he or she is a 
labour responsible for using such equipment, 
(f) To commit such other misconduct of similar nature as specified in 
the bye-law.  
(3) In the event of commission of any of the followi ng misconducts, 
annual salary increment of one year may be withheld or  promotion withheld for 
one year: 
(a)  To take any property outside the enterprise without the permi ssion 
of the competent person and use it or allow it to b e used by any 
unauthorized person,
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
61 
 
(b) To make attempt to make embezzlement in the employer ’s 
transaction, 
(c) To damage the employer’s property recklessly or negligently, 
(d) To stop the supply of food, water, telephone, el ectricity service or 
prevent movement within the workplace, 
(e) To intentional ly misus e, or cau se loss or damage to any goods kept 
or provisions made for the benefit, safety or health  of the labours, 
(f)  To commit such other misconduct of similar nature  as specified in 
the by-law.  
(4) A labour may be dismissed from the service if he or  she commits 
any of the following misconducts: 
(a) To batter or cause bodily injury to, or take host age the employer, 
any labour, customer or any person concerned with the  workplace 
with or without the use of arms or weapon, or cause  unrest or 
destruction in the area of the enterprise,  
(b) To take or give a bribe, 
(c) To steal any one’s property in the workplace,  
(d)  To make financial misappropriation in the ente rprise, 
(e)  To intentionally cause damage to any property t hat belongs to or is 
in the custody or use of the employer, 
(f) To remain absent from the work for more than thirt y consecutive 
days without having a leave sanctioned, 
(g) To do any act of divulging secrecy of any producti on technology 
related formula or confidential information of the enterprise or 
workplace where he or she is working with the inten tion of causing 
loss or damage to such an enterprise,  
(h) To act in collaboration with a competitive employer  in the similar 
nature of business of the enterprise or carry on any competitive 
business on his or her own or provide any secret inf ormation of the 
enterprise where he or she is employed to any competi tive employer, 
(i) To get convicted by the court of any criminal offense involving 
moral turpitude during the period of employment, 
(j) To make and submit any fake educational certificate and other 
certificate for the purpose of appointment,
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
62 
 
(k) To consume narcotic substance or liquor during the working hours 
or come to the workplace upon consuming the same, 
(l) To get punished for more than two times for the misco nduct 
pursuant to sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) within a period of three 
years,  
(m) To commit any misconduct if the prevailing law p rovides for the 
dismissal from service in the case of commission of  such 
misconduct.  
132. Prohibition of sexual harassment: (1) No person shall commit, or cause to be 
committed, any such act, with the exertion of undue inf luence, as considered to be 
sexual harassment under the law in the workplace or  in the course of work.  
(2) The employer may, depending on the condition and gr avity of the 
act, impose punishment to the extent of even dismis sal from the service on the 
labour who commits sexual harassment .  
(3) Where the employer or chief executive of any enterp rise commits 
sexual harassment, the trade union, victim or any m ember of his or her family may 
file a complaint in accordance with the law.  
133. Provisions relating to misconduct may be made in the bye-law: (1) Where 
specific punishment for specific type of misconduct has been prescribed by the 
respective regulatory bodies regulating banks or fin ancial institutions, schools, 
telecom service providers, hospitals, air services,  insurance services or enterprises 
of specific nature, provisions may be made in the by e-laws accordingly. 
  (2) Provisions may be made in the bye-law of an ent erprise for dismissal 
from the service as per the collective agreement or  with the approval of the 
Department in the event of commission of misconduct  of a serious nature. 
134. Power to suspend: (1) Where any labour is detained in accordance with law , such 
a labour shall ipso facto  be suspended during that period and shall not be e ntitled 
to remuneration for that period.  
Provided that if a labour who is detained upon a complaint filed by the  
employer himself or herself is proved to be innocent , he or she shall be entitled to 
the full remuneration for th at period.  
(2) Except in the cases referred to in sub-section (1) , if it does not 
appear appropriate to keep on engaging in work a la bour for whom the punishment 
referred to in sub-section (4) of Section 131 has b een proposed or if there is a
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
63 
 
possibility that he or she may destroy the evidence re lating to the charge made 
against him or her or obstruct the investigation , the employer may suspend such a 
labour. 
(3) While suspending any labour pursuant to sub-section  (2), he or she 
may not be suspended generally for more than three months. 
Provided that the period of suspension may be extend ed by a maximum of 
one month if the investigation is not completed.  
(4) The labour shall be entitled to half the remunerat ion during the 
period of suspension referred to in sub-section (2) . 
(5) Where a labour who has been suspended pursuant to sub -section (2) 
is acquitted of the allegation made against him or her, he or she shall be entitled 
to all such remuneration, and increment in salary if  any, receivable by him or her 
that remains after deducting the amount of remunera tion which he or she has 
received during the period of suspension.  
(6) Except where any labour is held in detention upon f irst information 
report or complaint by the employer himself or herself, the employer may 
terminate the service of such a labour if the period of suspension referred to in 
sub-section (1) exceeds ninety days. The opportunity hea ring need not be given to 
the concerned labour while so terminating the servi ce.  
135. Opportunity to be given to submit clarificatio n: Prior to imposing  punishment 
on any labour for misconduct, the authority imposing punishment shall provide 
such a labour with a notice giving opportunity to s ubmit clarification within a 
period of seven days, and such a notice shall clearl y state also the facts of 
commission of the misconduct and possible punishmen t imposable if it is proved.  
136. Authority imposing punishment: (1) The power to impose punishment for 
misconduct shall be vested in its chief executive in the case of an enterprise.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), if the bye-
law empowers any managerial level  labour to take final decision concerning the 
punishment imposable for any misconduct, such an aut hority shall have power to 
investigate and impose punishment.  
137. Period for taking decision: (1) Where any labour is found to have committed 
misconduct, it is necessary to commence action withi n two months from the date 
of knowledge of the commission of such misconduct.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
64 
 
(2) A decision shall be taken within three months from  the date of 
commencement of the action pursuant to sub-section (1).  
138. Punishment may be remitted: (1) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be 
deemed to bar the imposing of lesser punishment on any labour by proposing 
higher punishment .  
(2) Where any enterprise has made a bye-law providing f or lesser 
punishment than that imposable under this Chapter, the provision of the bye-law 
shall apply to the labours of such an enterprise .  
 
Chapter- 21 
Provisions Relating to Termination of Employment 
139. Security of employment: (1) Employment of any labour shall not be terminated 
in any condition except in accordance with th is Act and the rules or bye-law 
framed under this Act .  
(2) Proper and sufficient reason shall be given when t erminating the 
employment.  
140. Termination of time-based and work-based emplo yment: Employment of a 
labour engaged in a t ime-based or work-based employment shall be terminated in 
the following circumstance :  
(a) After the expiry of the time specified in the emplo yment contract, 
in the case of the labour engaged in the time-based  employment, 
Provided that if the labour is in project-based emp loyment 
and the period is extended or the period for the co mpletion of such 
a work is extended on the basis of the nature of th e work, the 
employment shall not terminate until that period. 
(b) After the completion of the work specified in the employment 
contract in the case of a labour who is in work-bas ed employment, 
or 
Provided that if the labour is in project-based emp loyment 
and the work is added or the period for the complet ion of such a 
work is extended on the basis of the nature of the work, the 
employment shall not terminate until that work remai ns. 
(c)  In the case of a labour in casual employment, a t the will of the 
employer or labour .
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
65 
 
141. Employment may be terminated voluntarily: (1) Any labour may, by submitting 
resignation in writing to the employer, terminate th e employment.  
(2) The employer shall accept the resignation submitted  pursuant to 
sub-section (1) within fifteen days and give informa tion thereof to the labour .  
(3) Where the employer does not accept the resignation within the time-
limit referred to in sub-section (2), such resignat ion shall be deemed to have been 
accepted ipso facto  from the day following the day on which the time-lim it expires.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in thi s Section, the 
resignation submitted by a labour may be cancelled th rough mutual consent 
between the employer and the labour .  
(5) If the labour continues working in the same enterp rise even after the 
day on which his or her resignation is accepted and becomes effective , his or her 
resignation shall be deemed to have been cancelled.   
142. Employment may be terminated on the ground of incompetence: (1) If, while 
evaluating the work performance of any labour pursua nt to the provisions set forth 
in this Act or the rules and bye-law framed under this Act,  the work performance 
of such a labour is found unsatisfactory or poor for three or more than three 
consecutive years, the employer may terminate the empl oyment of such a labour. 
  (2) Prior to terminating the employment pursuant to sub-section (1), the 
work performance evaluation must have been made as set forth in this Act or the 
rules and bye-law framed under this Act. 
(3) Prior to terminating the employment of any labour pu rsuant to this 
Section, the employer of any enterprise employing ten  or more labours shall give 
a period of at least seven days to the concerned lab our for clarification.  
143. Employment may be terminat ed on the ground of health:  (1) Where any labour 
becomes incapable of working as a result of physical  or mental incapacitation or 
grievous hurt or injury or it affects the work becau se of a long time required for 
medical treatment, the employer may, on the basis of recommendation by a 
medical doctor, terminate the employment of such a labour. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the 
employment of any labour may not be terminated during the period he or she is 
undergoing treatment in a hospital because of any a ccident or occupational disease 
while performing the work specified by the employer o r until one year from the 
date of commencement of his or her treatment at hom e if he or she is undergoing
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
66 
 
treatment at home, and the employer shall provide fu ll remuneration during suc h 
a period. 
Provided that the employer shall not be required to provide remuneration 
if the labour is entitled to receive the remunerati on facility from the Social 
Security Fund for the period of treatment. 
(3) In the case of a labour who is not able to attend the work of the 
enterprise on the ground of medical treatment in th e circumstance other than that 
set forth in sub-section (2), the employment of such  a labour may not be terminated 
until six months. 
Provided that this sub-section shall not be deemed to bar the removal from 
the service prior to that period if there is a clea r recommendation by a medical 
doctor to the effect that the labour cannot return to the work .  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), in cases 
where the labour who is physically incapacitated or has  sustained grievous hurt or 
injury can be engaged in any work suitable to the con dition of his or her health , 
the employer shall engage such a labour in work.  
144. Notice to be given: (1) Prior to terminating the employment relation in any 
circumstance except when employment is terminated up on action taken for 
misconduct, the employer or labour shall give a not ice as follows to each other:  
(a) Prior to at least one day, i n the case of employment for a maximum 
of four weeks,  
(b) Prior to at least seven days, in the case of employm ent for a period 
of four weeks to one year, and  
(c) Prior to at least thirty days, in the case of emplo yment for a period 
of more than one year.  
(2) Where the employer terminates employment without giv ing the 
notice referred to in sub-section (1), the employer shall pay the amount equal to 
the remuneration for the period requiring the notic e to be given to the concerned 
labour. 
(3) Where the labour terminates employment without givi ng a notice to 
the employer pursuant to sub-section (1), the employe r may deduct the amount 
equal to the remuneration for the period requiring the notice to be so given from 
the remuneration payable to the concerned labour.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
67 
 
145. Retrenchment may be made: (1) Where an enterprise faces financial problems 
in its operation or the labours become redundant be cause of the merger of more 
than one enterprises or the enterprise needs to be closed down partially or 
completely because of any other reason, the employer m ay retrench the number of 
labours.  
(2) When retrenching the labours pursuant to sub-secti on (1), the 
employer shall, in advance of at least thirty days befo re the date for retrenchment, 
give a notice, setting out the reason requiring ret renchment, possible date for 
retrenchment and probable number of labours to be r etrenched to the Office and 
the authorised trade union, if any, of the enterpris e or in the absence of such a 
union, to any trade union which is active in the ent erprise or the labour relation 
committee. 
(3) After giving the notice pursuant to sub Section (1 ), the employer 
shall hold discussion with the concerned trade unio n or the labour relation 
committee on the matters concerning the alternative s to the retrenchment of 
labours and the grounds and conditions for the sele ction of the labours for 
retrenchment, and the labours may be retrenched as p er the agreement reached 
upon the discussion.  
(4) Where the trade union or the labour relation commi ttee does not 
want to hold discussion pursuant to sub-section (3)  or no agreement is reached 
upon the discussion, the employer may, by giving info rmation of that matter to the 
Office, retrench the labours.  
(5) While retrenching the labours pursuant to this Section , retrenchment 
shall be made generally in the following order: 
(a) foreign labours, 
(b) those labours who have been awarded more punishmen ts 
comparatively for misconduct, 
(c) labour s whose standard of work performance is rather weak, 
(d) labours who have been appointed at the last out  of the labour s 
engaged in the same type of work.  
Provided that if it is necessary to retrench the lab ours 
who were appointed earlier, instead of making retre nchment 
in the order so specified as to retrench those who have been
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
68 
 
appointed at the last, retrenchment may be made by se tting 
out the reason for the same. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 5), except as 
otherwise agreed with the trade union, the office-b earers of the collective 
bargaining committee or the authorized trade union shall be retrenched las t in the 
order of priority. 
(7) While retrenching the number of labours, the employer shall pay a 
lump sum amount to be set by calculating at the rate  of one month ’s basic 
remuneration for each year of his or her service as  compensation to a labour who 
has completed the service period of at least one yea r.  
Provided that if the service period is less than on e year, he or she shall get 
the compensation proportionately.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 7), the labour 
who is entitled to the unemployment allowance under the social security laws shall 
not receive the compensation pursuant to sub-sectio n (7).  
(9) Where any enterprise is required to close down the whole or any 
part of the enterprise in pursuance of the order of  the Government of Nepal or 
Labour Court in accordance with law or any enterpris e in the special economic 
zone is required to retrench its labours, the provi sions of sub-section s (1), (2), (3) 
and (4) shall not be applicable.  
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in thi s Section, the 
provision contained in this Section shall not be ap plicable to any employer who 
employs ten or less than ten labours and makes retre nchment of labours.  
146. Resumption of operation: (1) Where, for any reason, the retrenchment of its 
labour s has been made but the enterprise resumes its operat ion within two years 
or needs to supply additional labours, the preferenc e for employment shall be 
given to the labours retrenched pursuant to Section  145.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), any other 
persons may be employed if the labour who has been r etrenched fail to appear in 
spite of the notice given to him or her as prescrib ed. 
(3) Where the employer does not give notice or does not  employ, the 
concerned labour may, not later than thirty-five days , make an application to the 
Labour Court.  
(4) Other provisions relating to this matter shall be as prescribed.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
69 
 
147. Compulsory retirement: Any labour who is in regular employment shall get 
compulsory retirement after completing the age of fi fty-eight years.  
Provided that if there is a need to make compulsory retirement at an age 
below the age of fifty-eight years for the work of a  particular nature, provision to 
that effect may be made in the bye-law by obtaining a pproval from the Council as 
prescribed.  
148. Payment of benefits: (1) In the case of an employee of which employment is 
terminated because of misconduct or in any other ma nner whatsoever, the 
employer shall pay all amounts including the remuneration, benefits receivable by 
him or her at the time of such termination to the l abour, not later than fifteen days 
of the termination of employment .  
(2) The employer shall extend necessary assistance in th e provision of 
such amount or benefits that is receivable by the la bour from the Social Security 
Fund, insurance or other body .  
(3) In the case of failure to pay such remuneration or benefits that is 
receivable by the labour within the period referred to in sub-section (1) or to 
extend assistance pursuant to sub-section (2),  rem uneration shall be paid to such 
a labour until the amount is paid as if he or she w ere in the service .  
(4) Where the labour does not appear to receive the re muneration or 
benefits, the employer may make payment to the labour’s  account or deposit the 
same with the Office, directly. 
(5) Other provisions relating to the deposit and payme nt of the amount 
referred to in sub-section (4) shall be as prescrib ed.  
149. Labours to get first priority: Notwithstanding anything contained in other 
prevailing law, in case of closure or liquidation o f any enterprise, the remuneration 
or other benefits due and payable to the labours sha ll be paid with first priority.  
Provided that where the insolvency law is applicable , it shall be dealt with 
accordingly.  
150. To issue the certificate of experience: Where the labour whose employment has 
been terminated requests for the certificate of exp erience, the employer shall give 
the certificate of work experience, stating, inter alia, the period of service and post 
of such a labour .
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
70 
 
Chapter- 22 
Provisions Relating to Labour Court  
151. Formation of Labour Court: (1) The Government of Nepal shall, by a 
notification in the Nepal Gazette, form a required number of labour courts.  
(2) The jurisdiction and seat of the Labour Court to be fo rmed pursuant 
to sub-section (1) shall be as specified in the sam e notice.  
(3) The Labour Court shall consist of one chairperson and two 
members.  
(4) Any sitting judge of the High Court or any person h aving the 
qualification of becoming a Judge of the High Court  shall be qualified to be the 
chairperson or member of the Labour Court.  
(5) Except when a sitting judge of the High Court is a ppointed, the 
tenure of the chairperson and members of the Labour  Court shall be four years.  
(6) The conditions of service and facilities of the ch airperson and 
members of the Labour Court shall be the same as th at of the Judges of the High 
Court.  
152. Majority decision to prevail: (1) The chairperson and members shall collectively 
exercise the jurisdiction of the Labour Court. 
  Provided that where the chairperson or any one member is  absent, even the 
bench of two members may try and adjudicate cases. 
  (2) A decision of majority of members shall be deemed to be a  decision 
of the Labour Court. 
  (3) If the two members constituting the bench hol d different opinions, 
such opinions shall be submitted to the third membe r, and the opinion concurred 
by the third member shall be deemed to be a decision  of the Labour Court. If the 
chairperson and member hold different opinions, the  opinion of the chairperson 
shall be deemed to be a decision of the Labour Cour t. 
153. Powers of Labour Court: The Labour Court may, in the course of deciding a 
case, exercise the following powers, in addition to  the powers set forth in this Act 
or the rules framed under this Act:  
(a) To examine witness, evidence, 
(b) To take the defendant’s statement equal to the note  of defence, as 
per necessity,
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
71 
 
(c) To order any party who is not made party or oppone nt in the case, 
on the basis of application by such party or of the nature  of the case, 
to appear in the course of hearing, and set as a pa rty to the case if 
so required, 
(d) To inspect any place or workplace related to the  dispute, 
(e) If the application made by any party to the case s ubmitting that it is 
necessary to defer the case until any case sub-judice  in the Labour 
Court is finally settled or to continue the same app ears to be 
reasonable, notwithstanding the sta te of the case, to issue an 
interlocutory order to any party to the case to stop any act for a 
certain time or give continuity to any act being carr ied out, with or 
without fixing a period,  
(f) To uphold, withhold or alter any direction, decisio n or order given 
by the Office or the employer, 
(g) The Labour Court shall, in holding the proceedi ng of and 
adjudicating the case, have the powers as mentioned  in the case of 
the matters set forth in th is Act or the rules framed under this Act , 
and the same powers as the District Court may exercise, in the case 
of the other matters.. 
154. Proceeding against contempt of court: (1) The Labour Court may institute 
proceeding for its contempt.  
(2) Where an act of contempt is established in the proceed ing instituted 
pursuant to sub Section (1), the Labour Court may im pose punishment of a fine 
not exceeding ten thousand rupees or imprisonment f or a term not exceeding six 
months or both on the offender .  
Provided that if the offender begs pardon to the sa tisfaction of the Labour 
Court, the Labour Court may forgive him or her or ab solve him or her of the 
punishment if already determined or reduce such puni shment or order not to 
execute the punishment subject to the compliance wi th such conditions as 
specified by the Labour Court, after deferring the p unishment on such conditions. 
155. Power to demand bank guarantee or deposit: If there is a possibility that one 
party will be entitled to receive any amount from the  other party when the case 
running under this Act is adjudged and there is a l ikelihood of non-payment of 
such amount by such a party, the Labour Court may, for  the execution of the
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
72 
 
decision, require such a party to deposit the amount  equivalent to th at amount or 
furnish a bank guarantee covering that amount.  
156. Power to order payment of interest: (1) Where judgment is made holding any 
party to the case liable to pay compensation or any ot her cash to the other party, 
payment of such compensation or cash shall be made n ot later than two months of 
the date of receipt of notice of the judgment or de cision. 
  (2)  In the event of failure to pay such compensation or cash within the 
period referred to in sub-section (1), an interest on such compensation or cash to 
be set by fifteen percent thereof shall be paid or rec overed with effect from the 
date of judgment in the case.  
157. Case may be compromised: (1) Notwithstanding the state of the proceeding of a 
case running in the Labour Court under this Act, th e Labour Court may, on the 
basis of the application made by the concerned party,  give permission to 
compromise or defer or withdraw such a case.  
(2) When compromising or deferring or withdrawing the case pursuant 
to sub-section (1), no fine, royalty or fee of any ki nd shall be charged.  
158. High Court to perform functions of Labour Court: (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, the Gov ernment of Nepal may, by a 
notification in the Nepal Gazette, assign the funct ions of the Labour Court to any 
High Court upon specifying its jurisdiction.  
(2) The High Court assigned pursuant to sub-section (1 ) may exercise 
all such powers as may be exercisable by the Labour C ourt pursuant to this Chapter 
while trying and adjudicating the case.  
159. T o forward the matter to the body having jurisdiction:  In making a decision 
on a case filed in the Labour Court or the Office p ursuant to this Act or the 
prevailing law that it has no jurisdiction, the Lab our Court or Office shall appoint 
the date for appearance and send the parties, along  with its case-file, to the 
concerned competent body for a decision.  
160. Procedures of the cases: Other provisions relating to the procedures of the cases 
to be filed in the Labour Court shall be as prescri bed.  
161. Appeal to the Supreme Court: (1) Any party who is dissatisfied with the order 
or judgment made by the Labour Court in a case orig inally tried and adjudicated 
by the Labour Court may make an appeal to the Supreme Court within thirty-five 
days of the date of knowledge of such an order or ju dgment .
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
73 
 
(2) Any decision made on appeal by the Labour Court shal l be final.  
 
Chapter- 23 
Provisions Relating to Complaint, Punishment and Ap peal 
162. Right to make complaint:  Where any person, employer, labour or office-bearer 
acts in violation of th is Act or the rules framed under this Act, the party who is 
aggrieved by such act or the concerned trade union with  the written consent of the 
aggrieved party may make a complaint to the authorit y competent to make a 
decision pursuant to Section 163 or 164, not later than six months from the date 
of commission of such act.  
163. Power of the Department or Office to decide: (1) The Department may conduct 
necessary inquiry into a complaint made on any of the following matters and do 
as follows:  
(a) To issue necessary order subject to this Act and im pose a fine not 
exceeding two hundred thousand rupees on any person tha t supplies 
labours without obtaining any license pursuant to th is Act and any 
person that hires and employs labour s through such a labour 
supplier, 
(b) To impose, on the basis of the number of such l abours, a fine not 
exceeding two hundred thousand rupees on any person who employs 
a foreigner without obtaining the labour permit pursu ant to this Act, 
and an additional fine at the rate of five thousand rupees   per person 
per month in case such a person continues to employ such a 
foreign er in spite of the punishment so imposed, 
(c)  To issue an order to maintain equality by impos ing a fine not 
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees on any person who 
discriminates labours at the time of employing or du ring 
employment contrary to Chapter 2, 
(d) To order a person who employs a labour without givi ng an 
appointment letter or without entering into an employment  contract, 
to give an appoint letter or to enter into an emplo yment contract 
upon imposing on such a person a fine not exceeding five hundred 
thousand rupees at the rate of ten thousand rupees per labour,
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
74 
 
(e)  To take departmental action pursuant to the pr evailing law against 
any inspector who causes loss or damage by committing  any act 
recklessly or with ulterior motive pursuant to Chapt er 15, 
(f) To give necessary order in case any person exercises  any unfair 
labour practice or makes transfer contrary to this A ct to the 
detriment of the labour or performs any act, action relating to 
promotion contrary to the bye-law of the enterprise,  
(g)  To give necessary direction to the concerned Of fice in case it does 
not perform any act, action required to be performe d by it within a 
certain period, pursuant to this Act and the rules framed under this 
Act, even within thirty days of the expiry of that per iod, 
(h) To do necessary work for the settlement of a dispute, if any, arising 
between a labour supplier and a main employer as to the 
remuneration and benefits to be provided to labours . 
(2) The Office may make necessary inquiry into an appl ication made on 
any of the following matters and do as follows: 
(a) To require the employer who employs a labour by p aying 
remuneration below the minimum remuneration or dedu cts 
remuneration or benefits contrary to this Act or the  rules framed 
under this Act to pay the deducted amount and a comp ensation not 
exceeding two times of such amount to the concerned labour, 
(b) To impose a fine not exceeding twenty thousand r upees  on any 
employer , labour or other person who hinders a government 
employee in the course of performance of his or her duties or submit 
false description or makes false statement or exert s or attempts to 
exert undue influence in a ny way, 
(c) To impose a fine at the rate of ten thousand rupee s per apprentice or 
trainee on an employer who engages any person as an apprentice or 
trainee contrary to this Act, issue an order to employ such an 
apprentice or trainee on regular employment and to p ay the 
remuneration and benefits accordingly, 
(d) To order recovering such compensation and damag es that is two 
times higher than the compensation from the employer  who does not 
deposit such amount of gratuity and of provident fun d or contribute
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
75 
 
such amount to the social security fund as may be rec eivable by the 
labour pursuant to this Act or the rules framed under th is Act or pay 
medical expenses or make insurance for compensation , 
(e) To give direction to the employer who makes retrenchment  contrary 
to this Act or in a discriminatory manner to refrain f rom doing so, 
(f) To give necessary direction to the employer who term inates the 
employment or prevents any labour from attending the work 
contrary to this Act or the rules or bye-law framed under this Act. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in thi s Act, nothing 
shall be deemed to bar the making of an application by any l abour to the employee 
to pursue the personal dispute settlement process a nd settle the dispute 
accordingly. 
(4) Any complaint made to the Department or the Offi ce shall be 
proceeded with and settled as prescribed.  
164. Decision may be made by the Labour Court: (1) If any person engages any one 
in forced labour, the Labour Court may punish such a  person with imprisonment 
for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not exc eeding five hundred thousand 
rupees or both and require such person to pay remune ration, allowance and 
benefits including damages that is two times of suc h amount to the labour.  
Provided that if any person takes another person out side Nepal and engages 
him or her in forced labour, it shall also order th e recovery of expenses incurred 
in bringing that other person into Nepal. 
(2) If any person dies or suffers grievous hurt as a re sult of violation, 
knowingly or recklessly, of any provision relating to  occupational safety and 
health set forth in this Act or the rules framed under th is Act or any person dies as 
or gets any of his or her bodily organ disabled or hi s or her physical or mental 
state becomes adversely affected a result of infect ion of occupational disease 
caused as a result of performance or non-performance  of any act or any part of the 
body becomes disabled or physical or mental state, the p erson who commits such 
act shall be liable to the punishment, if any, provi ded for in the prevailing law and, 
failing such provision, to the punishment of impris onment for a term not exceeding 
two years, and the Labour Court may requi re such person to pay appropriate 
compensation to the aggrieved person.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
76 
 
(3) Where a body corporate commits any offence punishab le under this 
Act, such body shall be punished with the fine, and if imprisonment is also 
imposable for such offence, the chief executive of such body shall be imprisoned 
accordingly. 
165. Appeal: (1) Any person who is not satisfied with any order o r decision made by 
the Department or Office in accordance with this Ac t or the rules framed under 
this Act may make an appeal to the Labour Court within thirty-five days. 
  (2) Any labour who is not satisfied with any decisio n made by the 
employer to terminat e employment or with punishment imposed with respect t o 
misconduct may make an appeal to the Labour Court within thirty-five days of the 
date of receipt of a notice of that decision or punishment. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2), nothing 
shall be deemed to bar the making of appeal accordi ngly if the bye-law of any 
enterprise provides for internal appeal.  
(4) The aggrieved party may make an appeal to the Labour Court within 
thirty-five days of the date of receipt of a notice of the decision made by the appeal 
hearing body or of the date of sixty days of the date on which appeal was made if 
such party does not receive a notice about the decision on appeal within that 
period .  
166. Decisions to be executed: (1) After a decision or judgment made by the Labour 
Court pursuant to this Act has become final or the limitation for making appeal 
has expired, the concerned party shall execute such decision or judgment .  
(2) The concerned party shall execute, in good faith, a ny agreement 
reached in respect of an individual or collective c laim between a labour or trade 
union and the employer bilaterally or before the Offi ce or any other body or 
authority or any arbitral award.  
(3) Where the concerned party fails to execute the agre ement or 
decision pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the ot her party may on his or her own 
or through the trade union or employers’ association  make an application to the 
Office for that purpose .  
(4) On receipt of the application pursuant to sub-sect ion (3), the Office 
shall write to the concerned employer or labour for the execution of such 
agreement, decision or judgment.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
77 
 
(5) If so asked pursuant to sub-section (4), the conce rned employer or 
labour shall execute such an agreement, decision or  judgment within fifteen days 
from the date of receipt of such direction.  
167. Power of the Office to have execution of decis ions: (1) Where the decision, 
judgment or agreement is not executed pursuant to S ection 166, the concerned 
party may make an application to the Office.  
(2) On receipt of the application pursuant to sub-sect ion (1), the Office 
may cause such a decision, judgment or agreement to be executed by adopt ing any 
or all of the following measures vis-à-vis the empl oyer, enterprise or labour who 
has to execute such decision, judgment or agreement : 
(a) To send a request to the concerned body or authority to withhold 
any immovable property or auction the property, 
(b) To send a request to freeze a bank account, 
(c) To send a request for the suspension or withholdin g of such 
concessions or facilities as may be enjoyable pursuan t to the 
prevailing law,  
(d) To suspend the labour permit or license of the con cerned party, 
(e) To make any other appropriate order.  
(3) If so requested by the Office to do any act referred to  in sub-section 
(2), the concerned body shall do accordingly.  
(4) If the decision or judgment is not executed within  three months from 
the date when the application was made pursuant to sub-section (1) or within 
fifteen days of the completion of the process referr ed to in sub-sections (2) and (3) 
or such a decision or judgment is challenged legall y, a complaint may be made in 
the Labour Court for punishment pursuant to Section  168.  
168. Power to impose punishment in the event of non -execution of judgment, 
compromise or agreement: (1) The Labour Court shall give a notice prescribin g 
the time limit to the concerned party for the execut ion of any judgment on labour 
related matters made by the Labour Court or the Sup reme Court. 
(2) The Labour Court may impose the punishment with a fine not 
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees or with impri sonment for a term not 
exceeding one year on any employer or labour who fails to execute or delay s or 
lingers the implementation of the order given by the  Office for the execution of 
the order, judgment made by the Labour Court or arbi tral award or understanding
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
78 
 
or agreement entered into between the employer and the labour pursuant to this 
Act. 
Provided that if the order, judgment, compromise, a greement or 
understanding is executed within the period prescri bed by the Labour Court, the 
Labour Court may annul such punishment or give parti al or full exemption from 
the enforcement of such punishment if already senten ced. 
 
Chapter- 24 
Miscellaneous 
169. Procedure relating to service of notice: (1) A process or notice sent by the 
employer to the labour or vice versa shall immediate ly be acknowledged and a 
receipt of such acknowledgment, provided.  
(2) Where a process or notice could not be served in accordance  with 
sub-section (1), such a process or notice shall be dee med to have been received by 
the concerned party if it is sent by registered couri er or post to his or her address , 
with one copy thereof being posted at the workplace,  and a memorandum being 
executed in witness of three persons, and informati on thereof is given to the 
Office.  
Provided that in the case of the application or notice g iven by the labour, it 
is not required to post it at the workplace.  
(3) Where any one refuses to accept such a process or notice, it may be 
sent through fax or email or other electronic means  of communication to him or 
her. If so sent, such a process or notice shall be deemed to have been served except 
as otherwise proved.  
(4) Where, in the case of any matter required to be inf ormed by the 
employer collectively, such information shall be deemed  to have been received by 
all the labour s if the notice thereof is posted on the notice board  of the workplace 
and written information thereof is given to the tra de unions active in the enterprise. 
170. Fixation of basic remuneration:  (1) The basic remuneration of the labour on 
task-based employment shall be determined as prescri bed.  
Provided that if not so determined, the minimum rem uneration fixed for the 
labours shall be regarded as the basic remuneration .
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
79 
 
(2) In the case of labours on piece rate work , the rate of wage per piece 
shall be determined as prescribed on the basis of the m inimum remuneration fixed 
pursuant to this Act.  
171. Special provisions relating to managers and ma nagerial level labours: (1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in th is Act, nothing contained in 
this Act shall be deemed to bar the hiring of a man agerial level labour working in 
the capacity of chief executive on time based employm ent, fixing of terms and 
benefits of service and termination of his or her s ervice.  
(2) The managers and managerial level labours are not allowed to 
submit collective demands or take part in collectiv e bargaining or in a strike, on 
behalf of any trade union.  
172. Entitlement to remuneration and other benefits : (1) Where a labour who is 
terminated from the employment is reinstated in empl oyment by an order or 
decision of the Office or Department or Labour Cour t, such labour shall be entitled 
to receive the remuneration and other benefits from  the employer for the period 
from the date of termination to the date of reinsta tement.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to b ar the making of 
judgment enabling the labo ur to receive a reasonable amount as compensation in 
addition to the amount referred to in sub-section (1) fr om the employer, instead of 
reinstating such labour on the basis of the merits of the case.  
173. Increment of insurance amount: On recommendation of the Council, the 
Government of Nepal may, by a notification in the Nep al Gazette, periodically 
increase the medical insurance and accidental insur ance amount specified in this 
Act.  
174. Delegation of authority: The Ministry or Department or Office may so delegate 
any or all of the powers conferred on it by this Act  that such power is exercisable 
by any office or officer. If such delegation is made,  a notice thereof shall be 
published in the Nepal Gazette.  
175. Saving of acts done in good faith: No action shall be instituted against any labour 
inspector, occupational safety and health inspector or any officer or employer or 
labour deputed in inspection for the loss or damage , if any, caused to any person 
as a result of any act done or attempted to be done in good faith in the course of 
performing his or her duties.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
80 
 
Provided that such person shall be personally liable  with respect to any act 
done knowingly or with bad intention.  
176. Special powers of the Ministry:  If information is received that the party is 
compelled to suffer harassment because of failure t o decide any application made 
to the Office or Department for a long time, except  for the matter which is sub 
judice in the Labour Court under this Act or if it seems appropriate that such 
application is to be proceeded with by the Ministry b ecause of the subject matter 
contained in the application being complex, nothing  contained elsewhere in this 
Act shall be deemed to bar the Ministry form examini ng and deciding such 
application. The decision so made shall be deemed t o be a decision made by the 
body of first instance, and the party who is not satisfied with such decision may 
make an appeal to the Labour Court.  
177. Labour coordination committee: (1) There shall be a central level labour 
coordination committee consisting of such members a s prescribed, under the 
chairpersonship of the Director General of the Depa rtment.  
(2) The functions, duties and powers of the committee shall be as 
prescribed  
178. Transitional provisions: (1) The labours engaged in permanent service at the  time 
of commencement of this Act shall ipso facto be deemed to be the labours in 
regular employment pursuant to this Act.  
(2) The labours employed on contract, daily wage basis o r otherwise at 
the time of commencement of this Act shall be requi red to make the employment 
contract pursuant to Chapter 3. Nothing contained i n this Act shall be deemed to 
bar the making of adjustment of the remuneration an d benefits receivable at the 
time of making such employment contract to the provi dent fund amount and other 
benefits payable pursuant to this Act not later than  three months of the 
commencement of this Act.  
(3) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to b e prejudicial to 
the conditions of service and benefits of any labour  who is receiving the benefits 
in excess of that set forth in the Act under the pr evailing law or collective 
agreement at the time of the commencement of this A ct.  
(4) For the purpose of sub-section (3), the benefits t hat remain after 
paying the benefits specified in the Act to the pres cribed body shall be provided 
by adjusting the same in other headings.
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
81 
 
(5) Where any judgment made by the Office, Labour Court or other 
court under the Labour Act, 1992 (2048) and Trade U nion Act, 1992 (2049) before 
the commencement of this Act has not been executed and an application is made 
within one year of the date of the commencement of t his Act, such a judgment, 
decision or order shall be executed or caused to be  executed as if it were made in 
accordance with this Act.  
(6) The welfare fund established under Section 37 of t he Labour Act, 
1992 (2048) and Section 13 of the Bonus Act, 1974 ( 2030) shall continue its 
operation until a separate law relating to social security is made.  
(7) The Cour t in existence at the time of the commencement of this Act 
shall exist until the formation of the court pursua nt to this Act .  
179. This Act to prevail: The matters contained in this Act and the rules fram ed under 
this Act shall be governed by this Act and Regulation and the other matters, by the 
prevailing laws.  
180. This Act not to apply: (1) The following matters shall be governed as foll ows: 
(a) This Act shall not apply to the Nepal army, Nepal Po lice, Armed 
Police F orce and National Investigation.  
(b) The prevailing law relating to civil service shall  apply in the case of 
the civil service. 
(2) Where the prevailing law provides for the conditio ns and benefits 
of service in relation to the service established u nder a special law and the special 
economic zone, such service shall be governed accor dingly.  
(3) Where the prevailing law has no provision in relat ion to the 
remuneration, conditions and benefits of service of  any labour , the provisions of 
this Act shall ipso facto apply in the case of the r emuneration, conditions and 
benefits of service of such labour .  
(4) When making any decision, order or judgment that th is Act will not 
apply to any labour , such decision, order or judgment shall be made sett ing out, 
inter alia, which law provides for the rights and ben efits conferred by this Act in 
the case of such labour.  
(5) Where the employer of an enterprise to which the Wo rking 
Journalists Act, 2051 applies executes the employmen t contract pursuant to this 
Act or any agreement thereby making applicable the pr ovisions of this Act
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
82 
 
between the employer and the labour of such enterpri se, this Act shall also apply 
to such labour. 
181. To frame and implement directives and procedur es: (1) The Ministry may, for 
the purpose of implementation of th is Act or the rules framed under this Act, frame 
and implement necessary directives and procedures .  
(2) Employers' commodities associations or federations and trade union 
associations or federations may frame and implement codes of good labour 
practice on policy matters relating to the labour.  
182. Powers to frame rules: (1) The Government of Nepal may frame necessary rules  
for the implementation of th is Act.  
(2) When framing rules pursuant to sub-section (1), se parate rules may 
be framed in the case of businesses, services and i ndustries of special nature or of 
the informal sector.  
183. Repeal and saving : (1) The following Acts have been repealed: 
(a) The Labour Act, 1992 (2048),  
(b) The Industrial Apprenticeship and Training Act, 19 83 (2039),  
(c) The Retirement Fund Act, 1986 (2042).  
(2) The cases filed and sub judice under the Acts set forth in sub-section 
(1) shall be transferred to the Labour Court.  
(3) Any acts and actions performed under the Acts set f orth in sub-
section (1) shall be deemed to have been performed under this Act.